The Gnostic Society Library

| Valentinus Index |  Gnostic Society Library | Gnosis Archive |



The Figure of Error in the Gospel of Truth

Introduction

The Gospel of Truth is one of the most important Valentinian works
discovered as part of the Nag Hammadi cache. The work is not a gospel in
the sense of an account of the deeds and sayings of Jesus. Instead it
represents an extended homily or meditation on the gospels and on Christ.
Many scholars consider it to be the work of Valentinus himself.

The opening paragraphs of the Gospel of Truth describe the primordial fall
and the origin of the material universe in rather vague, euphemistic
terms. This "creation tale" contains no explicit references to
mythological figures familiar from other Valentinian texts (e.g. Sophia,
the demiurge, etc.). However, these passages do refer to a
semi-personified "error." This has led some to conclude that a some
mythological figure such as the Demiurge or Sophia underlies these
references to error. Other scholars have rejected such interpretations.
The competing theories will be examined and evaluated on the basis of the
text itself and relevant parallels from other Valentinian sources.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

The Competing Interpretations

The concept of error (Greek plane) plays a central role throughout in the
Gospel of Truth. In several passages near the beginning of the work, error
is refered to in a semi-personfied manner. One group of scholars suggests
that "error" in these opening passages of the work refers the figure of
Sophia familiar from other Valentinian texts. For example Simone Petrement
(1990) and Attridge and McRae (1988, p 38) both link error to Sophia.
Theories identifying error with Sophia can easily be discounted. For
example, later in the text error is linked to the crucifixion of Jesus
(18:21-31). The text also speaks of error's destruction (26:15-32). This
is at odds with any known Gnostic myth of Sophia, particularly a
Valentinian one.

Another group of scholars interpret error to be a reference to the
Demiurge. For example, Kurt Rudolph argues that "presumably the 'passions'
are circumlocutions for things which are abundantly described in
mythological terms, for example 'error' as an image of the demiurge..."
(Rudolph 1983, pp. 83-84). Hans Jonas also interprets this passage in a
similar manner (Jonas 1963, p. 190). As we shall see, this theory also has
some insurmountable problems.

Last of all, some scholars have identified error to be a reference to the
Valentinian devil (diabolos) or world-ruler (cosmocrator) (cf. Against
Heresies 1:5:4). According to Helderman (1981), error "far more clearly
resembles the Valentinian Kosmokrator or diabolos." The same position is
also held by Menard (1972). As we shall see, this theory has some support
in the Gospel of Truth as well as related texts.

Due to problems with the above theories, some have suggested that error
represents various combinations of the above mythological figures. For
example, David Dawson (1992) suggests that error represents both the
Demiurge and Sophia! In his view, Valentinus has "simplified the Gnostic
narrative by assimilating characters, replacing Ialdabaoth and Sophia with
'Error'" (Dawson 1992, p 146). This position represents something of a
cheat and will not be considered separately. Many of the arguments we will
consider in regards to identification of error with either figure
individually also apply here.

Other scholars have cast doubt on claims that any mythological figures can
be read into the text. For example, Robert Haardt argues that in the
Gospel of Truth, "the Sophia myth, (and) the figure of the Demiurge, her
son...are lacking..." (Haardt 1971, pp. 207-208). Bentley Layton agrees
that the Gospel of Truth "makes no specific reference to the gnostic myth"
(Layton 1987, p 250). Similar conclusions are also reached by Williams
(1988) in her monumental work on this text. Indeed as we will demonstrate
in this article, error seems to be used in the Gospel of Truth as a
synonym for the familiar Valentinian concept of "lack" or "deficiency" (
Greek: hysterema).

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

The Origin of "Error" According to the Gospel of Truth

In order to investigate competing claims about this work, it is necessary
to examine the passage in question in some detail. It is also useful to
examine the passage in the context of the work as a whole. The text of the
"creation" passage as translated by Layton (1987) is as follows:

Inasmuch as the entirety had searched for the one from whom they had
emanated, and the entirety was inside of him -- the inconceivable
uncontained, who is superior to all thought - ignorance of the Father
caused agitation and fear. And the agitation grew dense like a fog, so
that no one could see. Thus error found strength and labored at her
matter in emptiness. Without having learned to know the truth, she took
up residence in a modeled form (a material body), preparing by means of
the power, in beauty, a substitute for the truth. Now to the
inconceivable uncontained this was not humiliating; for the agitation
and fear and the modeled form (material body) of deception were as
nothing, whereas established truth is unchangeable, imperturbable, and
cannot be beautified. For this reason despise error since she has no
root. She dwelt in a fog as regards the Father, preparing, while she
dwelt there, products and forgetfulnesses and fears, so that by them she
might beguile those of the middle and take them captive. (16:31-17:36)

This so-called "creation" passage opens with a description of how all of
the divine emanations ("the entirety") lie within the father yet are
somehow ignorant of him. As a result they began to search for him. Their
ignorance of the Father leads to "agitation and fear". In a parallel
account later in the text, the author describes how the Father "was the
object of fear, and disturbance and instability and indecisiveness and
division, there was much futility at work among them and much empty
ignorance" (29:1-8). The fall is described in similar terms in another
Valentinian text: "Instead of perfection, he saw a defect; instead of
unification, he saw division; instead of stability, he saw disturbances;
instead of rests, tumults" (Tripartite Tractate 80:15-19). Ignorance of
the Father in all cases results in "fear" as well as "agitation" or
"disturbance."

The agitation resulting from the futile quest for the father is described
as being "dense like a fog so no one could see" (17:11-13). Elsewhere in
the text, it is described as being like when "one falls asleep and finds
oneself in the midst of nightmares" (29:8-11). This "fog" results in the
appearance of error or perhaps is error. Other parts of the text also
describe how error arises because of ignorance of the Father. One passage
describes how the Aeons "had swerved after accepting error because of the
Depth of him who surrounds every way, while nothing surrounds him (i.e.
the Father)" (22:20-32). According another passage, the unknowability of
the Father (i.e. his "depth") led them to sin "in the midst of their
error" (32:36-37). They are those "who had gone astray from the presence
of certain others, who fell short of mercy, in error and bondage"
(31:23-26).

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Parallels with other texts

It is worthwhile comparing this description of the fall to accounts in
other Valentinian works. One important difference is that in the Gospel of
Truth, the Aeons as a group are described as having strayed into error. In
conventional Valentinianism, only the twelfth Aeon, Sophia falls into
error. For example, according to the teacher Marcus, "an error occurred in
connection with the twelfth number" i.e. Sophia (Against Heresies 1:16:1).
According to the account of Ptolemy, "Sophia (Wisdom), the very last and
youngest of the Twelve emitted by Humanity and Truth, plunged forward and
fell victim to suffering without the embrace of her consort...This
suffering consisted of a search for the Father. It was her wish to grasp
his greatness, which she was unable to do because she had involved herself
in an impossible undertaking. And she suffered great distress owing to the
greatness, depth and inscrutability of the Father and her love for
him"(Against Heresies 1:2:2) It is noteworthy that just as in the Gospel
of Truth, the catalyst for the fall is the "search for the Father." The
Aeons are assumed to be ignorant of the Father and it is their misguided
wish to understand him that leads to disaster. In Ptolemy's account,
Sophia's ignorance of the Father leads to "suffering." Similarly, the
ignorance of Aeons in the Gospel of Truth leads to "agitation and fear."
Sophia's suffering is regarded by Ptolemy as the origin of matter.

The account in the Tripartite Tractate (74:18f) is also extrememly
relevant here. The Tripartite Tractate similarly describes how the Logos
(i.e. Sophia) fails in his quest to find the Father. According to this
text, the Sophia-Logos "did not reach the attainment of the glories of the
Father, the one whose exalted status is among things unlimited. This one
did not attain him." Instead, the Sophia-Logos brought forth "that which
was deficient in itself" corresponding to the sufferings described by
Ptolemy. This took the form of a false reality in the form of "likenesses,
copies, shadows, and phantasms, lacking reason and the light, these which
belong to the vain thought, since they are not products of anything." The
Tripartite Tractate goes on to describe how "the Logos (i.e. Sophia) was a
cause of those who came into being and he continued all the more to be at
a loss and he was astonished. Instead of perfection, he saw a defect;
instead of unification, he saw division; instead of stability, he saw
disturbances; instead of rests, tumults. Neither was it possible for him
to make them cease from loving disturbance, nor was it possible for him to
destroy it. He was completely powerless, once his totality and his
exaltation abandoned him" What is noteworthy is that in the Tripartite
Tractate as in the Gospel of Truth, the fall results in "disturbances" and
"tumults" which have an energy and a false reality of their own. This
false reality belongs to the Sophia-Logos' "vain thought" or "arrogance"
much as the false reality in the Gospel of Truth belongs to the "error" of
the Aeons. This primordial chaos corresponds to matter which according to
the Tripartite Tractate was later formed into the visible world by the
Demiurge.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Is "error" the Demiurge?

Is it possible that "error" in the Gospel of Truth represents a direct
reference to the Demiurge? It is clear that error is closely associated in
some manner with matter. According to the text in the Gospel of Truth,
error "labored at her matter in emptiness"(17:15-16). However, it is far
from clear that this refers to the formation of the material world by the
Demiurge. It could instead refer to the generation of matter itself.
According to other Valentinian accounts, matter is generated when Sophia
fall into a state of deficiency before the Demiurge even appears on the
scene. It is just as credible to relate this passage to that event as it
is to the subsequent shaping of matter into the world by the Demiurge.

The following sentence describes how error "took up residence in a modeled
form"(17:17). The use of the term "modeled form" (plasma) seems to
indicate that the passage is a reference to Adam. According to Bentley
Layton's (1987) notes on his translation of the text, the term modelled
form is "Jewish and Christian jargon for the human body, based on the fact
that the creator modeled Adam out of earth." Thus, according to the text,
error itself is present within Adam's body!

This passage presents a major stumbling block to the theory that error is
the Demiurge. In authentic accounts of the Demiurge, he is described as
creating Adam's "modeled form" (e.g. Reality of the Rulers 87:26-88:3).
Here, rather than creating the "modeled form," error is instead is
described as taking up residence in it! This is at odds with the role
played by the Demiurge in Gnosticism in general and Valentinianism in
particular i.e. creation of Adam's body.

The only way to maintain the theory that error is the Demiurge is to
reject Layton's translation of this passage. However, three of the four
major translations of this text phrase this sentence in a very similar
manner to Layton (Grant 1961 pp. 146-161 and Foerster 1974 pp. 53-70).
This leaves the Demiurge theory in very serious trouble (despite all the
arm-waving by some on Usenet).

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

"Error" as lack

A less simplistic but ultimately more satisfying explanation is possible.
Helderman (1981) argues that error represents the "state of consciousness
of the Aeons/Pneumatics." A similar interpretation is also advocated by
Bentley Layton (1987). He argues that in the Gospel of Truth, "the figures
and events of myth are psychological." Stevan Davies (1989) similarly
argues that while error is in reality present in the minds of the Aeons,
they falsely perceive it as external to themselves much as they falsely
perceive a material creation external to themselves. It is an "illusory
self" which is "projected out and externalized" when in truth there is no
reality outside of the self (Davies 1989). These three scholars agree that
to the extent that error can be seen as a mythological figure, it should
be understood as the psychological force which is active in the fallen
Aeons. This has strong support in the text. The fallen Aeons are those who
had "swerved after accepting error" (22:20) and who sinned "in the midst
of their error" (32:36-37).

In other Valentinian texts, this psychological force acting within the
fallen Aeon Sophia is ussually termed "lack" or "deficiency" (Greek
hysterema). In a few cases it is termed "error" (e.g. Against Heresies
1:16:1). Valentinians identify lack with matter and the material body and
argue that lack is destroyed by the advent of gnosis.

It is our contention that "error" is simply a synonym for "lack". This
would not be surprising considering the similarity in meaning between the
two terms. A strong case can be made for this interpretation if it can be
shown that:

1. the terms "error" and "lack" are used interchangeably in the Gospel of
Truth

2. error (like lack) is closely identified with matter and the physical
body

3. error (like lack) is destroyed by the advent of gnosis (or truth)

This theory has strong support within the text itself. Error is the state
into which the straying Aeons have fallen. They have "swerved after
accepting error" (22:20-32). They are the ones who "sinned in the midst of
their error" (32:36-37). They are those "who had gone astray from the
presence of certain others, who fell short of mercy, in error and bondage"
(31:23-26). The fact that at times error is semi-personified does not
necessitate reading a mythological entity such as the Demiurge into the
text. Personified "error" can simply be seen as a metaphor for
(non-personified) error or deficiency. Such a personification of "error"
or "foolishness" is a common metaphor in ancient writings (see Helderman
1981). In almost every case, it is contrasted with "truth" or "wisdom."
That's exactly what we see here. Error acts "without having learned to
know the truth" (17:18) and represents a "substitute for the
truth"(17:20).

The identity of lack and error is supported in many passages where the two
seem to be used interchangeably. Error arises because the Aeons did not
know the Father. They "accepted error" because of the Father's "depth"
i.e. his unknowability (22:20f). Similarly , "lack came into being because
the Father was not known" (24:28-32). Both "error" and "lack" are
described as coming into being because the Aeons did not know the Father.
Surely this is no coincidence.

According to the "creation tale," the material realm is in some manner is
intimately associated with error. According to the text, it is "her (i.e.
error's) matter" (17:16f). Elsewhere the text describes how "the realm of
appearance which belongs to the lack is the world" (24:22-24). Thus the
material realm is said to belong to both error and lack further supporting
the hypothesis that the two are interchangeable. There is further
confirmation of this from elsewhere in the text. According to one passage,
"the lack belonging to the realm of matter did not result from the
infinity of the Father...rather the Father's Depth is immense and it is
not with him that the thought of error resides"(35:8-18). Note that the
"lack belonging to the realm of matter" is described as the "thought of
error." Again note the intimate association of matter, error and lack. In
a notable parallel, the teacher Theodotus speaks of the realm of matter as
"the thought of the deficiency" (Excepts of Theodotus 22:7). As is normal
in Valentinian thought, the Gospel of Truth describes an intimate
association between matter and lack. What is is noteworthy that the same
intimate relationship is said to exist between matter and error.

According Valentinian myth, the lack expresses itself as the negative
emotional states (sufferings) experienced by the fallen Aeon Sophia such
as grief, fear and confusion. These negative emotional states are the
origin of matter. In the Gospel of Truth, error is similarly said to
produce negative emotional states such as "forgetfulness", "fear" and
"agitation" in those subject to it. As in other Valentinian texts, these
mental states seem to be the basis of matter. As the text says, these
emotional states became solidified into matter when "the agitation grew
dense like a fog, so that no one could see" (17:11-12). As discussed
above, the sentence that describes how "error found strength and labored
at her matter in emptiness" (17:14-16) can thus be understood to refer to
the creation of matter itself. Error/lack both creates and is matter.

The presence of error within Adam's material body (i.e. modeled form") is
not difficult to explain in light of this theory. In a parallel account of
the creation of Adam's body, Valentinus describes "the lack (hysterema)
within the act of modeling" of Adam (Valentinus Fragment 5/D). Like error,
"lack" is said to be present within Adam's "modeled form." The close
identity of the fallen state ("lack" or "error") with matter is typical of
Valentinianism. The "error" or "lack" present in the modeled form is
simply matter itself. The teacher Herakleon similarly describes the
material body as "the deep matter (hyle) of error" (Herakleon Fragment
23). Another source describes how "mankind were involved in great
ignorance and error" which can be seen as matter itself (Against Heresies
1:15:2).

The line where "error" is said to "beguile those of the middle and take
them captive" (17:34-36) also provides further evidence that the Demiurge
theory is incorrect. In Valentinian jargon, "those of the middle" refers
to ordinary Christians i.e. those who are already subject to the Demiurge
(Layton 1987, Against Heresies 1:8:3). The Demiurge would have no need to
take captive those who are already subject to him. A simple explanation is
possible. The presence of error or deficiency within Adam and his
descendants (i.e. "those of the middle") results in "products and
forgetfulnesses and fears" which may "take them captive."

The Gospel of Philip contains a significant parallel here. That work
describes how ignorance is the "root of evil which is within" each of us
(Gospel of Philip 83:19-20). According to this text, "if we are ignorant
of it, it takes root in us and produces its fruit in our heart. It
dominates us; we are its slaves. It takes us captive, so that we do things
that we do not want; and do not do the things we want. And it grows
powerful because we do not recognize it." (Gospel of Philip 83:24-28).
Like error, ignorance is the root of evil that resides within us. And like
error, it "grows powerful" and "takes us captive" if we are ignorant of
it.

In his study of the Gospel of Truth, Jan Helderman (1981) suggests that if
it is necessary to identify error with a Valentinian theological figure, a
far better candidate than the Demiurge is the Valentinian devil or "ruler
of the world" (cf. Against Heresies 1:5:4). Like error, the devil
(diabolos, literally "deceiver") is the personification of matter and
ignorance. The Gospel of Truth does mention the devil using terms that
closely resemble those applied elsewhere to error. Near the end of the
Gospel of Truth, the author advises the elect: "Do not become a (dwelling)
place of the devil, for you have already brought him to nothing"
(33:19-22). The author cautions the elect who have already purged
themselves of error against again becoming a dwelling place of "the
devil." Note that the text assumes that fallen human beings are a dwelling
place for "the devil." This can be brought into connection with claims
that error resides in the modeled form of fallen human beings.

This connection between the devil and error is supported by Valentinus'
disciple Herakleon. According to him, "the devil has no will, but only
desires...his nature is not of the Truth, but the opposite to the Truth:
error and ignorance. Therefore he can neither stand in Truth, nor have the
Truth in himself. From his nature he has falsehood as his own, and by
nature he can never speak the Truth. Not only is he himself a liar, but he
is also falsehood's father. His 'father' means his nature, since it is
composed of error and falsehood" (Herakleon Fragment 46-47). It is
noteworthy that Herakleon explicitly identifies the devil but not the
Demiurge with error.

Error is described in the Gospel of Truth as contemptible because it has
"no root"(17:29-30). In this work, rootlessness is related to
impermanence. In the view of the author, "what has no root also has no
fruit: truly, although it may think to itself 'I have come into being,'
next it will wither of its own accord" (28:16-23) Only things that have a
root in the Father are permanent and bear "fruit". All else is ultimately
"empty" i.e. it has no true existence.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Forgetfulness and the Downfall of Error

The passage following the "creation tale" is also of some interest. It
concerns error and its ultimate downfall through the activity of Christ:

The forgetfulness which belongs to error is not apparent. It is not
[...] with the Father. It was not in the Father's company that
forgetfulness arose, and surely then not because of him! Rather, what
comes into being within him is acquaintance, which appeared so that
forgetfulness might perish and the Father might come to be known.
Inasmuch as forgetfulness arose because the Father was unknown, from the
moment the Father comes to be known, there will no longer be
forgetfulness. It is to the perfect that this, the proclamation of the
one they search for has made itself known, through the mercies of the
Father. By this the hidden mystery Jesus Christ shed light on those who
were, because of forgetfulness, in darkness. He enlightened them and
gave them a way, and the way is the truth, about which he instructed
them. For this reason, error became angry at him and persecuted him. She
was constrained by him and became inactive. He was nailed to a tree and
became the fruit of the Father's acquaintance. Yet it did not cause ruin
because it was eaten. Rather, to those who ate of it, it gave the
possibility that whoever he discovered within himself might be joyful in
the discovery of him. (17:36-18:31)

Like lack, forgetfulness, seems to be used more or less interchangeably
with error. The first paragraph of this passage includes a retelling of
the myth of the fall. However, instead of error, the text describes how
"forgetfulness" arose "because the Father was not known." (18:8-10) In a
related passage, a "modeled form" is attributed to forgetfulness
(21:34-37). It seems natural to connect the modeled form of forgetfulness
with that attributed to error above (17:17).

The sentence describing the dissolution of forgetfulness has a very close
parallel elsewhere in the text. The dissolution of lack is described using
almost the same words: "Inasmuch as the lack came into being because the
Father was not known, from the moment the Father is known the lack will
not exist." (24:28-32). In a related passage discussed previously, the
text describes how those who remain in ignorance are the "modeled form" of
forgetfulness which will perish along with it (21:34-37).

The second paragraph begins with an account of how Christ "shed light on
those who were, because of forgetfulness, in darkness" (18:17-20). He
gives them "a way" which is the truth. This can be related to a passage
which occurs shortly after this one. It describes how Christ "has brought
many back from error, going before them unto their ways from which they
had swerved after accepting error because of the Depth of him who
surrounds every way, while nothing surrounds him (i.e. the Father)"
(22:20-32) Those who have fallen have strayed from the way of the truth
because they have "accepted error" in their search for the one "who
surrounds every way." Note that error is not a personification in this
passage. As in the creation account above, error arises because of the
ignorance of the Aeons. It represents the fallen state into which the
Aeons have strayed because of their search for the Father.

The text ascribes the persecution and crucifixion of Jesus by the Roman
authorities to error. According to the text, "error became angry at him
and persecuted him"(18:16-18). Similarly, the Tripartite Tractate
describes how those "who are from the order of the 'left' have a path to
error: not only did they deny the Lord and plot evil against him, but also
toward the Church did they direct their hatred and envy and jealousy"
(Tripartite Tractate 122:2-9). Once again it is "error," or rather, those
on the "path to error" who are held responsible for the crucifixion of
Jesus.

The Gospel of Truth goes on to compare the cross to the tree of knowledge
in the Garden of Eden. In contrast to the tree in the Garden of Eden, the
cross bears the "fruit of the Father's acquaintance" (i.e. Christ) which
gives the discovery of the Father to those who eat of it (18:24-31). The
original tree resulted in error taking up residence in those who ate of it
while the new tree brings truth and acquaintance (gnosis).

The passage describes how as a result of the truth brought by Christ,
error was "constrained by him and became inactive." (1822-23). A more
detailed account of the dissolution of error occurs later in the text. It
would be useful to examine it at this point:

All the ways moved and were disturbed, for they had neither basis nor
stability; and error became excited, not knowing what to do; she was
troubled, mourned, and cried out that she understood nothing, inasmuch
as acquaintance, which meant the destruction of her and all her
emanations had drawn near to her. Error is empty, with nothing inside of
her. Truth came forward, all its emanations recognized it and they
saluted the Father in truth and power so perfect that it set them in
harmony with the Father. (26:15-32)

This passage can be related to the passage discussed above. Error's anger
is related to the fear that the advent of the truth brought by Christ will
bring about its destruction. The language used here to describe error has
some close parallels in accounts of the fallen spiritual element.
According to those accounts, the fallen spiritual element like error
"understood nothing..." (AH 1:4:1). As a result of the fall of the
spiritual element into deficiency, "she suffered grief because she had not
understood, fear lest life leave her as light had; uncertainty at all of
these; and everything in lack of acquaintance" (AH 1:4:1). Error is not
identical with the fallen spiritual element. To the contrary, the fallen
spiritual element which has "accepted error" experiences lack of
understanding and emotional turmoil as a result. As described elsewhere,
"the Father's Depth is immense and it is not with him that the thought of
error resides. It (the thought of error) is a fallen thing that can easily
be made upright through the discovery of him who came to that which he
would bring back" (35:14-21)

The passage describes error as "empty". Elsewhere error is said to be
active in "emptiness" (17:17). The appearance of Truth which is fullness
(pleroma) results in the dissolution of error and her "emanations" (i.e.
matter). This passage can be brought into close connection with the
passages where the related abstractions of forgetfulness and lack are said
to cease to exist when the Father become known (18:7-10, 24:28-32).
Similarly the Devil is "brought to nothing" by those who have gnosis
(33:19-22).

Freed from error, the emanations of Truth are set in "harmony with the
Father."(26:32). They are also freed of matter which is destroyed along
with error. Like error, matter is ultimately "empty" or unreal with
"nothing inside of it" (26:26-27).The text describes how matter is
destroyed by gnosis: "all will purify themselves out of multiplicity into
unity, consuming matter within themselves as fire, and darkness by light
and death by life " (25:13-18). Matter, like error, simply goes up in a
puff of smoke like a bad dream in the presence of truth and gnosis.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Conclusion

In conclusion, it seems apparent that the terms error, lack, and
forgetfulness are used more or less interchangeably in this text. The text
describes how the spiritual emanations or Aeons are initially in ignorance
about the Father. They attempted to search for their origin but this only
led them to fall into lack/error/forgetfulness. Error/lack/forgetfulness
is essentially identical with matter and the "realm of appearance." The
Father is eventually made known through the intercession of the Son. From
the moment the truth becomes known, error/lack/forgetfulness ceases to
exist. In addition, the "form" of lack/error/forgetfulness i.e. matter and
the material body is also destroyed.

Using constantly shifting metaphors, the Gospel of Truth describes a myth
of how the spiritual element falls into error and is eventually restored
to gnosis by Christ. However, the mythological figures familiar from other
Valentinian texts are wholly absent in this text. Instead, as Bentley
Layton puts it, in the Gospel of Truth, "the figures and events of myth
are psychological . . . the underlying dynamic of Gnostic myth
(fullness--lack--recapture of the lacked) is reapplied microcosmically, at
the level of the individual Christian." (Layton 1987, pp250-251).
Valentinus describes what he regards as the essential features of his
teachings without clothing them in the mythological language he and his
followers often used.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Bibliography

H.W. Attridge and G. W. MacRae 1988. The Gospel of Truth, in The Nag
Hammadi Library in English, edited by James M. Robinson. New York: Harper
and Row, pp 38-51

Stevan Davies 1989. Gnostic Idealism and the Gospel of Truth. in RELIGIOUS
1 Volume - Systems Religious and Writings>edited by J. Neusner, E.
Frerichs and A. J. Levine, Scholars Press, Atlanta

David.Dawson 1992. Allegorical Readers and Cultural Revision in Ancient
Alexandria. Berkeley. University of California Press.

Werner Foerster, 1974. Gnosis: A Selection of Gnostic Texts; vol. 2:
Coptic and Mandaic Sources . Oxford, Clarendon Press

Robert. M. Grant 1961. Gnosticism. New York: Harper and Row

Robert Haardt, 1971. Gnosis: Character and Testimony, Leiden, NL:
E.J.Brill

Jan Helderman, 1981. Isis as Plane in the Gospel of Truth Gnosis and
Gnosticism edited by M. Krause. Leiden. E.J. Brill

Hans Jonas. 1963. The Gnostic Religion: The Message of the Alien God.
Beacon. Boston.

Bentley Layton, 1987 The Gnostic Scriptures . Garden City, NY:Doubleday &
Co.

J.E. Menard, 1972. L'Evangile de Verite, Nag Hamadi Studies volume 2
Leiden: E.J.Brill

Simone Petrement, 1990. A Separate God: The Christian Origins of
Gnosticism. San Francisco: Harper.

Kurt Rudolph, 1983.Gnosis: The Nature and History of Gnosticism .San
Francisco, Harper and Row.

J.A. Williams. 1988. Biblical Interpretation in the Gnostic Gospel of
Truth from Nag Hammadi. Society of Biblical Literature Dissertation Series
79. Scholar's Press. Atlanta.





Content authored by David Brons

