The Gnostic Society Library

| Valentinus Index |  Gnostic Society Library | Gnosis Archive |



Faith (pistis) and Knowledge (gnosis)

The distinction between faith (pistis) and knowledge (gnosis) is a very
important one in Valentinianism. Pistis, the Greek word for faith denotes
intellectual and emotional acceptance of a proposition. To the
Valentinians, faith is primarily intellectual/emotional in character and
consists accepting a body of teaching as true.

Knowledge (gnosis) is a somewhat more complex concept. Here is the
definition of gnosis given by Elaine Pagels in her book The Gnostic
Gospels: "...gnosis is not primarily rational knowledge. The Greek
language distinguishes between scientific or reflective knowledge ('He
knows mathematics') and knowing through observation or experience ('He
knows me'). As the gnostics use the term, we could translate it as
'insight', for gnosis involves an intuitive process of knowing oneself...
Yet to know oneself, at the deepest level is to know God; this is the
secret of gnosis."(The Gnostic Gospels, p xviii-xix) Bentley Layton
provides a similar definition in The Gnostic Scriptures: "The ancient
Greek language could easily differentiate between two kinds of
knowledge... One kind is propositional knowing - the knowledge that
something is the case ('I know Athens is in Greece'). Greek has several
words for this kind of knowing-for example, eidenai. The other kind of
knowing is personal aquaintance with an object, often a person. ('I know
Athens well'; 'I have known Susan for many years'). In Greek the word for
this is gignoskein...The corresponding Greek noun is gnosis. If for
example two people have been introduced to one another, each can claim to
have gnosis or aquaintance of one another. If one is introduced to God,
one has gnosis of God. The ancient gnostics described salvation as a kind
of gnosis or aquaintance, and the ultimate object of that aquaintance was
nothing less than God" (The Gnostic Scriptures, p 9).

Faith corresponds to the intellectual/emotional aspect of religion while
gnosis corresponds to the spiritual/experiential aspect. Valentinians
linked the distinction between pistis and gnosis to the distinction they
made between psyche and pneuma. The psyche (soul) was identified by them
with cognitive/emotional aspect of the personality (the ego
consciousness). The pneuma (spirit) was identified by them with the
intuitive/unconscious level. The pyche was seen as consubstantial with the
Demiurge while the pneuma was consubstantial with Sophia (and hence with
God). Both the psyche and pneuma were capable of salvation. Psyche was
saved through pistis while pneuma was saved through gnosis. Hence they
distinguished two levels of salvation: psychic and pneumatic.

The psychic level of salvation was characterized by conversion (metanoia)
and faith (pistis). This corresponds to receiving oral and written
teachings since the psyche "requires perceptible intruction". (Irenaeus
Against Heresies 1:6:1). Herakleon describes the psychic level of
salvation as "believing from human testimony" (Herakleon Fragment 39).
Through pistis and psychic salvation, one attained to the level of the
Demiurge. In order to be saved the person had to freely chose to believe
and to do good works (Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:6:2). The psychic level
of salvation was decisive in that it opened the person to the possibility
of attaining the pneumatic level. Receiving the Valentinian tradition was
only a first step towards the goal of gnosis.

The superior pneumatic level of salvation depends on the person having
already attained to the psychic level. As the Gospel of Philip says, "No
one can receive without faith" (GPhil 61:35-36) Elsewhere in the same
work, the author uses an agricultural metaphor to describe this process:
"Our earth in which we take root is faith. The water by which we are
nourished is hope. The air by which we grow is love. And the light is
aquaintance (gnosis), by which we ripen to maturity" (GPhil 79:25-32)

At the pneumatic level the person was reborn through spiritual
resurrection and directly experienced the divine Truth through gnosis.
Herakleon described this as follows: "At first men believe in the Savior
because they are lead to that point by men, but when they encounter his
word they no longer believe because of human testimony alone, but from the
Truth itself" (Herakleon Fragment 39). Through gnosis one could
participate in and experience the divine realm. Thats what the Gnostic
doctrine of the resurrection refers to: spiritual rebirth through mystical
experience (gnosis). One attained gnosis through the grace of God, not by
choice. Psychic salvation was by choice while pneumatic salvation was by
election.

If Elaine Pagels is correct, then the Valentinians believed that those who
only attained psychic salvation would ultimately attain pneumatic
salvation at the end of the world. After they died, those who had only
attained psychic redemption waited with the Demiurge until the end. Then
they joined those who had pneumatic redemption for the "wedding feast of
all the saved" and they "all become equal and mutually recognize one
another" (Excerpts of Theodotus 63:2). Then they entered the Pleroma to be
joined to an angel.

If this is correct then the only difference between psychic salvation and
pneumatic salvation is a matter of timing. One could attain pneumatic
salvation now by becoming a Valentinian or wait until the end to attain
it. Despite its lower value than gnosis, pistis was decisive for
salvation!

In orthodox Christianity, pistis is an end in itself. The object of pistis
is pistis itself. This easily leads to a rigid dogmatism. Salvation comes
to be seen as acceptance of a specific body of dogma to the exclusion of
all others. In Valentinianism and other forms of "Gnostic" Christianity,
the object of pistis is gnosis. The teachings are seen as a series of
metaphors that point to the higher reality of gnosis. This helps explain
the diversity of thought found within Valentinianism.

The teaching about faith and gnosis is at the heart of the dispute between
the Valentinians and Irenaeus of Lyon. The Valentinians criticized
Irenaeus' rigid emphasis on dogma and pistis (faith) alone at the expense
of gnosis. In their view, Irenaeus' Christianity was unspiritual and
offered only the lower psychic level of salvation. while they themselves
had attained the higher pneumatic salvation (Irenaeus Against Heresies
1:6:1-4).

The terms "Gnosis" "Gnostic" and "Gnosticism" are often used by modern
writers to describe Valentinianism. From the discussion above it should be
clear that using the term 'gnosis' to describe Valentinian teaching is
contrary to the use of the term by the Valentinians themselves. Gnosis
refers to mystical experiece and is not restricted to a particular group
or period of history. The term "Gnostic" (possessing gnosis) was rarely
used by the Valentinians to describe themselves. They prefered to be
called things like 'the elect', 'the spiritual ones', 'the church of the
superior seed' or 'disciples of God'. The term "Gnosticism" was coined in
the 19th century to describe the teachings and beliefs of various second
century Judeo-Christian groups including the Valentinians. Those we now
call "Gnostics" would never have used a term like "Gnosticism" to describe
their teachings.

To summarize, the Valentinians made a clear distinction between belief and
gnosis. To them belief in a body of teachings (Valentinian or otherwise)
was much inferior to gnosis. They never apply the term 'gnosis' to their
teachings. The word is reserved to refer to salvation through experience
of the divine. Failure to draw the distinction between belief and gnosis
can lead to an inaccurate picture of Valentinianism and Gnosticism in
general.



Content authored by David Brons

