The Gnostic Society Library

| Valentinus Index |  Gnostic Society Library | Gnosis Archive |



The Name and Naming in Valentinianism

Valentinus was a second century AD Gnostic Christian mystic and
speculative theologian. He founded a theological school that preserved and
further developed his ideas after his death in about 160 AD. The
Valentinians and related speculative groups are often called 'Gnostic'
because of the role that mystical knowledge (gnosis) plays in their
thought.

In Valentinus' thought, speculation on the Name and on naming play an
important role. The notion of the Name is explicitly present in about half
of the surviving Valentinian sources and can be implied in most of the
remainder. The notion has been discussed in detail previously by Thomassen
(1993) in relation to semiotics and by Zyla (1996). While the notion of
the Name is not unique to the Valentinians, they did develop the idea in
some unique and unusual directions.

The concept of the Name in Valentinianism has links with Jewish
speculation on the Divine Name. The Valentinian liturgy preserved by
Irenaeus makes the connection clear. In one of the baptismal prayers, the
Name is explicitly identified with Iao (Hebrew Yaho) which is a variant of
Yahweh (Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:21:3). A connection to Judaism is not
all that surprising given the Jewish roots of both Christianity and
Gnosticism.

In Valentinian thought, the Son is identical with the Name. In The Gospel
of Truth, Valentinus says, "Now the Name of the Father is the Son ... he
begot him as a Son and gave him his Name" (Gospel of Truth 38:6-13 cf.
also 39:19-21). Similarly, Theodotus writes of "the Name which is the Son,
the form of the Aeons" (Excerpts of Theodotus 31:4). The association of
Christ with the Name derives from early Christian speculation that has its
ultimate origins in Jewish Christianity. In several passages in the New
Testament, Jesus is said to have received the divine Name. For example in
Saint Paul: "For this reason God raised him to the highest place and gave
him the Name which is greater than any other name (Philippians 2:9) This
passage is quoted in several Valentinian sources including 'The Prayer of
the Apostle Paul'. In the Gospel of John, Jesus says, "I kept them safe by
the power of your Name, the Name you gave me" (John 17:12). Thus the
notion that the Son possessed the divine Name was well known in early
Christianity. The unique feature in Valentinianism is that the Son not
only possesses the Name, he is identical with it.

The identity of the Son with the Name can only be explained by
understanding the notion of naming in Valentinianism. In Valentinian
thought, naming is the same as generation. Hence, the Father's generation
of the Son and his act of naming the Son are the same thing. In the Gospel
of Truth, the Father "begot him as a Son and gave his Name" (38:10-13) and
"bore him unto himself as a Name" (38:32-34). Elsewhere in the same work,
Valentinus states that all things that truly exist have a name, "for what
does not exist has no name" (39: 11-12).

Through the act of naming, the thing which receives a name becomes
virtually identical with what is referred to by the name. Thus the Son who
receives the Father's Name becomes closely identified with the Father. The
Gospel of Philip discusses this notion: "Only one name is not uttered in
the world, the Name that the Father bestowed on the Son. It is above every
other - that is the Name of the Father. For the Son would not become a
Father had he not put on the Name of the Father" (Gospel of Philip
54:5-10).Thus the Son who receives the Name of the Father is himself
called 'Father' in many Valentinian sources (e.g. Irenaeus Against
Heresies 1:1:1).

There is an intimate association between the name and that which is named.
According to Valentinus all things that truly exist do so in association
with their name: "For what does not exist has no name - indeed what would
a nonexistent be named? - but what exists, exists along with its name"
(Gospel of Truth 39:11-16). The linking together of the name and that
which is named is expressed elsewhere in Valentinian theology through the
concept of the syzygy (linked pairs). In the syzygy, the "male"
corresponding to form is joined with the "female" corresponding to
substance. In most forms of Valentinian thought, even the Father is a
syzygy. His inexpressible nature is expressed by having him united with
his Thought (or Silence). The Son is also generally conceived of as a
syzygy. He is Mind united with Truth. Inasmuch as both Father and Son are
both syzygies, they are together described as the first Tetrad. (see
Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:1:1). The Tetrad is itself linked with the
fact that the divine name is expressed by four letters in Hebrew.

In Valentinian theology, the Son emanates a series of divine attributes or
'Aeons'. The Aeons follow the pattern established in the first Tetrad and
are arranged into pairs (syzygies). The relationship of the Son to the
Aeons is unclear without taking account of the notion of the Name. How the
Aeons are related to the Name (Son) is clearly spelled out in the teacher
Marcus as follows: "The pronunciation of the Name took place as follows.
He spoke the first word of it which was the beginning, and that utterance
consisted of four letters. He added the second and this also consisted of
four letters. Next he uttered a third and this again embraced ten letters.
Finally, he pronounced a fourth which was composed of twelve letters. The
enunciation of the whole Name consisted of thirty letters or elements, and
of four distinct utterances" (Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:14:1) Using the
metaphor developed by Marcus, each of the Aeons correspond to an
individual letter of the Name. In addition to the Tetrad, there are
twenty-six Aeons. Again we note a connection to Judaism. In Hebrew
numerology, the divine name has a numerical value of twenty-six. Four and
twenty-six give a total of thirty Aeons.

The Aeons share in or are individual instances of the Name. They represent
the various aspects of the Son's personality e.g. Word, Human Being,
Church, Wisdom, etc. Only together as the Son do they constitute the
complete Name. This relationship between the Aeons and the Son is
described in the Tripartite Tractate with the following words: "He is each
and every one of the Totalities forever at the same time. He is what all
of them are." (Tripartite Tractate 67:7-10) In another passage from the
same work: "All of them exist in the single one, as he clothes them
completely and he is never called by his single Name. And in this unique
way they are equally the single one (Son) and the Totalities (Aeons)"
(Tripartite Tractate 66:30-36). Even though the Aeons represent aspects of
the Son, they are to some degree are conceived of as distinct
personalities.

It is a key feature of Valentinian theology that the Aeons are ignorant of
their role as part of the Name. This is discussed in Marcus: "No one of
them perceives the form of that whereof it is only an element. It does not
perceive or know the pronunciation of it's neighbor, but believes that
which it expresses names the whole" (Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:14:1). As
a consequence, they are also ignorant of the Father himself . As the
teacher Ptolemy puts it, "The First Father was recognized only by the
Only-Begotten (Son) who came into existence through him, that is, by Mind,
whereas he remained invisible and inconceivable to all the others"
(Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:2:1, cf. Gospel of Truth 19:7-10 ). This
astonishing idea has its root in the notion that the emanation of the Name
by the Father was a process of self-limitation. Valentinus himself admits
that it is an surprising idea, "It was quite amazing that they were in the
Father without being aquainted with him and that they alone were able to
emanate, inasmuch as they were not able to perceive and recognize the one
in whom they were" (Gospel Truth 22:27-33). The Aeons can be thought of as
unintegrated aspects of the Son's overall personality who are unaware of
the Name even while they form part of it.

The longing of the Aeons to know their origin leads inevitably to
disaster. Valentinian theologians expressed this through a myth in which
Sophia, the youngest Aeon becomes separated from her syzygy. This fall
leads to a disruption of the Name. According to Theodotus, "The Aeon which
desired to grasp that which is beyond knowledge fell into ignorance and
formlessness. Therefore he brought about a void of knowledge which is a
shadow of the Name, which is the Son, the form of the Aeons. Thus the
partial name of the Aeons is the loss of the Name" (Excerpts of Theodotus
31:3-4). This is the ultimate origin of the physical universe. The things
in this world were seen as separated from their name and existing in a
state of deficiency and ignorance.

Through an act of grace, the Name is restored. According to Theodotus,
"For then they recognized that what they are, they are by the grace of the
Father, an inexpressible Name, form and knowledge (gnosis)" (Excerpts of
Theodotus 31:3). The Aeons became united with the Son who then became
known as the Savior. According to Marcus, "The restitution of all things
will take place when the whole has reached the one single letter and one
and the same expression is sounded" (Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:14:1).
The Aeons are joined to the Son and the Name is restored when they all
pronounce the Name together.

In some sense, the restoration of the Name is linked to the notion that
Aeons receive their name from the Son. In the Tripartite Tractate it says
"The one from whom they take their name, he is the Son who is full,
complete and faultless" (Tripartite Tractate 62:34-38). The unification of
the Aeons with the Son is described in the Tripartite Tractate: "The Son
in whom the Totalities are well-pleased put himself on them like a
garment, through which he gave perfection to the perfect one and gave
perfection to the defective one and gave confirmation to those who are
perfect" (Tripartite Tractate 87:1-5). The Son then becomes integrated
into a single personality.

However, the fall of Sophia had given rise to a state of existence (the
material world) which lacks true reality because it lacks the Name. The
world and the human beings in it are said to exist in a state of ignorance
and deficiency because they came into being apart from the Name. According
to Valentinian tradition, human beings are formed in the image of the
preexistent human being who can be identified with the Son (Valentinus
Fragment 1). Valentinus compares the creation of Adam, the first human
being, to the creation of a defective portrait. The portrait is an
imperfect likeness but "the Name completed the deficiency within the act
of modeling." (Valentinus Fragment 5, cf. also Fragment 1). The activity
of the Son within Adam completed the lack within him and reunited him with
the Name. Naming fills up the deficiency within the human being such that
the person no longer exists in a state of ignorance but in gnosis
(knowlege).

In the Gospel of Truth the reception of gnosis is equivalent to having
one's name called by the Father. "Those whose names he foreknew were
called at the end as persons having gnosis. It is the latter whose names
the Father called" (Gospel of Truth 21:25-28). Receiving a name is
equivalent to receiving the Name. The individual name can be seen as an
instance of the Name much in the same way as the Aeons are instances of
the Name. Thus the Father's self-naming as Son is linked to the Father's
self-naming as every individual.

In many Valentinian sources, the elect are described as possessing the
Name. In the Gospel of Philip, "one who receives the Holy Spirit has the
gift of the Name" (Gospel of Philip 64:25-26, also 54:10-13). Similarly,
Valentinus says, "Who then can utter his Name, the great Name, but him
alone who possesses the Name - and the children of the Name in whom the
Father's Name reposed and who in turn reposed in his Name" (Gospel of
Truth 38:25-32cf also 43:20-22). The source of the notion that the elect
possess the Name is found in the book of Revelation where it is said to be
written on their foreheads (Revelation 14:1 cf. also 22:4).

Another metaphor used by the Valentinians to describe gnosis is being
joined to a bridegroom angel. In Theodotus, the notion of being joined to
an angel is linked to receiving the Name. (Excerpts of Theodotus 22:4-5)
The angels are closely associated with the Savior and can be considered as
instances or parts of the Savior just as the individual's name spoken by
the Father is an instance of the greater Name. In Theodotus we find the
notion that the angels share in the Name (the Son). He refers to this as
angelic baptism (Excerpts of Theodotus 22:4-5). Thus the bridegroom angels
should be seen as essentially identical with the names that the Father
calls. At the reception of gnosis, one receives one's angel/name.

As discussed above, receiving a name is equivalent to receiving true
existence. In the Gospel of Truth and the Treatise on Resurrection, only
those who have gnosis (i.e. the Name) possess true reality. All else is
illusion. According to the Treatise on Resurrection, "Suddenly the living
are dying - surely they are not alive at all in this world of apparition!
The rich have become poor, rulers overthrown: all changes, the world is an
apparition" (48:20-27). All things that do not possess a true name are
illusion.

The Valentinians drew a sharp distinction between false worldly names and
real names. This theme is best developed in the Gospel of Philip.
According to that work, "Names given to worldly things are very deceptive
since they turn the heart aside from the real to the unreal...The names
that one has heard exist in the world[. . .] deceive. If the names were
situated in the eternal realm, they would not be uttered on any occasion
in the world, nor would they be assigned to worldly things: their goal
would be the eternal realm" (Gospel of Philip 53:23-28). False worldly
names serve to deceive human beings and distract them from the true Name.
The demonic worldly powers took advantage of this: "The rulers wanted to
deceive humanity, inasmuch as they saw that it had kinship with truly good
things: they took the names of the good and gave them to the nongood, to
deceive humanity by the names and bind them to the nongood" (Gospel of
Philip 54: 18-25). Thus false names keep human beings attached to the
illusion and separated from the true Name.

Jesus becomes closely identified with humanity by taking on a human body.
His human body is seen as consubstantial with the Church. Drawing on the
metaphor from Saint Paul that the church is the body of Christ, Theodotus
says, "The visible part of Jesus was Sophia (Wisdom) and the church of the
superior seed which he put on through the body but the invisible part was
the Name which is the only begotten Son" (Excerpts of Theodotus 26:1). The
corresponding metaphor in the Gospel of Truth is the "living book" which
contains the names of all the saved that the Son takes up (Gospel of Truth
20:10-14 cf. Revelation 20:15).

Valentinian Christology emphasizes that the human Jesus is redeemed by
being joined with the Savior at his baptism. The Son is "the Name which
came down upon Jesus in the dove and redeemed him" (Excerpts of Theodotus
22:6). The redemption of the human Jesus is seen by the Valentinians as
applying to all who form part of the "church of the superior seed". The
human Jesus is joined to the Name. All who form part of the spiritual
church which is identical with the human Jesus are also joined to the
Name. In the Interpretation of Knowledge, the human Jesus who represents
the Church is called the "humiliated one"(12:18-22)and the "reproached
one" (12:29-31). Again it is the Name who redeems: "Who is it that
redeemed the one that was reproached? It is the emanation of the Name"
(Interpretation of Knowledge 12:29-31cf also 12:18-22). The descent of the
Son into Jesus at his baptism is simultaneously the redemption of the
human Jesus and the redemption of all who are joined with him.

Just as the Son becomes identified with the Father by receiving his Name,
the individual Christian also becomes identified with Christ by receiving
the Name. As the Gospel of Philip says, "Such a person is no longer a
Christian but a Christ" (Gospel of Philip 67:26-27). The person becomes
part of the "church of the superior seed" which is the visible part of
Jesus in this world. (Excerpts of Theodotus 26:1) Just as the Son may be
called 'Father' because he has the Name of the Father, so the individual
can be called 'Christ' because he possesses the Name. The Savior is
identified with the Father (as his Name), with the Aeons (as instances of
the Name) and with the individuals he saves (by naming).

The Name is said in many sources to be received in baptism which is also
called redemption in some of the sources. According to the Tripartite
Tractate, "there is no other baptism apart from this one alone which is
redemption into God - Father, Son and Holy Spirit when confession is made
by faith in those names which are a single Name of the gospel" (Tripartite
Tractate 127:28-35). In the Valentinian baptismal liturgy preserved in
Irenaeus, baptism is performed into the Name. Here is a selection from the
text: "In the Name of the Father of all, into Truth the Mother of all,
into him who descended into Jesus... The Name hidden from every divinity,
rule and power... May your Name turn out to be to my benefit o Savior of
Truth... in the Name of IAO... Peace to all on whom the Name rests"
(Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:21:3). In baptism, the person who is redeemed
is said to be joined with their angel and to receive "the same Name as
that in which his angel was baptized before him" (Excerpts of Theodotus
22:4-5).

As noted in Dawson (1992), Thomassen (1993), and Zyla (1996) the Name is
closely identified by Valentinus with 'bold speaking' or 'free speaking'
(parhesia). This notion of 'bold speech' as a characteristic of the
presence of the Name seems to be derived from the New Testament. In the
book of Acts, speaking boldly, healings and miracles are all said to be
produced by the presence of the Name (Acts 4:29-30). According to
Valentinus, the Father's "free act of speaking is the manifestation of the
Son" (Valentinus Fragment 2). He goes on to say that the Son visits the
heart of the individual in order to purify it. Similarly, in his account
of the creation of human beings, the presence of the Name within Adam is
said to produce 'bold speech' which frightens the angels(Valentinus
Fragment 5). Just as the Father expressed himself boldly in the Son, so
the Son expresses himself in "bold speech" within the individual person.
As Zyla (1996) states, "Through the sacrifice of Jesus, gnosis of the
Father was gained and can be passed on through parrhesia (bold speech)".
Gnosis of the Name produces "bold speech" in the individual.

Valentinus attributes inspired speech to the presence of the Name. The
Name causes the individual to "utter sounds superior to what its modeling
justified" (Valentinus Fragment 1). According to Marcus, inspired speech
results from being joined to one's bridegroom angel (Irenaeus Against
Heresy 1:13:3). This further confirms the thesis that the angel is
identical with the name. The experience of gnosis is the reception of
one's angel/name which is a particular instance of the Son/Name.

Inspired speech is an image of the Father's "bold speaking" of the Name in
the Son. However, it is not identical with the speaking of the Name.
According to the Gospel of Philip, "Those who possess this Name think it
but do not speak it" (Gospel of Philip 54:10-12). Instead, "For our sakes
Truth engendered names in the world - Truth to which one cannot refer
without names. Truth is unitary, [worldly names] are multiple, and it is
for our sakes that it lovingly refers to this one thing by means of
multiplicity" (Gospel of Philip 54:13-17). Inspired speech is the worldly
image of the Name.

The Valentinians derived the notion of the Name from Judaism and other
forms of early Christianity. They developed it in some rather unussual and
distinctive directions. Many Valentinians made the concept central to
their Christology and to their understanding of salvation. A thorough
understanding of Valentinian thought is impossible without taking account
of this concept.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Bibliography

Dawson, David. 1992. Allegorical Readers and Cultural Revision in Ancient
Alexandria. Berkeley, University of California Press

Foerster, Werner. 1972. Gnosis: A Selection of Gnostic Texts; vol. 1:
Patristic Evidence. Oxford, Clarendon Press

Layton, Bentley. 1987. The Gnostic Scriptures. Garden City, NY, Doubleday

Thomassen, E. 1993. Gnostic semiotics - the Valentinian notion of the
Name, Temenos vol. 29, pp 141-156

Zyla, Roy. 1996. Valentinian Soteriology of the Divine Name, SBL
Abstracts, S152.





Content authored by David Brons

