The Gnostic Society Library

| Valentinus Index |  Gnostic Society Library | Gnosis Archive |



Organization of the Valentinian School

Valentinians were not a separate church or denomination. They were a
school offering a fuller esoteric interpretation of Christian doctrine.
They did not see themselves or their teachings as being in conflict with
Catholic Christianity. They saw themselves as successors of Saint Paul
through an apostolic succession of teachers. According to school
tradition, Valentinus had been instructed by Theudas who had himself been
taught by Paul (Clement of Alexandria Stromata 7:17).

While eminent religious scholars and teachers often played a leading role
in the movement, they were not seen as mediators between the individual
and the divine. The individual who attained to gnosis was seen as having
direct access to the divine without the need for external mediation. A
natural consequence of this is egalitarianism. In fact there is no record
of any permanent ecclesiastical offices among the Valentinians.

While Valentinians participated in the public life of the Catholic Church,
they also held their meetings separately from the congregation of which
they formed part. Many of their meetings were open to all interested
parties and served to attract potential converts to the movement. Such
meetings were surprisingly open and egalitarian affairs. This must have
impressed orthodox critic Tertullian who reports with astonishment : "They
all have access equally, they all listen equally, they all pray equally -
even pagans if they happen to come... They also share the kiss of peace with
all who come." (Tertullian Prescription Against Heretics 41) Anybody who
came to a meeting was seen as potentially spiritual and was made welcome.
While newcomers would not have been allowed to address the group, any of
the full initiates could be invited to speak based on drawing lots
(Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:13:3).

One feature of Valentinian meetings that sometimes brought them into
conflict with the clergy was the celebration of the eucharist and various
other sacraments. Egalitarianism also extended to ecclesiastical offices.
Valentinian initiates took turns performing the various liturgical tasks
ensuring a high degree of participation by the membership. According to
Tertullian, "Today one man is bishop and tomorrow another; the person who
is a deacon today, tomorrow is a reader; the one who is a priest is a
layman tomorrow. For even on the laity they impose the functions of
priesthood." ( Tertullian Against the Valentinians 1) He goes on to relate
that even women could take the role of bishop, much to his horror.

Only the elementary Valentinian teachings were available at such public
meetings. Initiates were expected to discern the newcomer's level of
spiritual development and act accordingly. This discussed in the parable
of appropriate diets in the Gospel of Philip: "Bodily forms will not
deceive them, rather they consider the condition of each person's soul and
they speak to that person accordingly. In the world there are many animals
that have human form. If the disciples of God recognize that they are
hogs, they feed them acorns; if cattle, barley chaff and fodder; if dogs,
bones; if slaves, a first course; if children, a complete meal" (Gospel of
Philip 81:3-13 cf. Hebrews 5:12-14). If a person was considered to be at a
material level of development (i.e. "an animal") they received the nothing
more than the teaching available at the public meeting ("acorns", "chaff"
and "bones").

If the person was considered to be at an animate level (i.e. "a slave")
they would be invited to private classes. In these classes they recived
elementary teachings ( "a first course") in order to determine if were
worthy of further instruction. Valentinians saw most Christians as fitting
into this category. Pupils assigned to this category had the potential to
move on to the next level. If the person had progressed to the highest
spiritual level and become a "child," they were invited to join an
advanced class where they would receive the complete teaching. According
to Tertullian, complete instruction could last as long as five years and
involved rigorous self-discipline. It should be noted that all who
received the private instruction were bound by the "duty of Silence" not
to disclose it to non-initiates (cf. Tertullian Against the Valentinians
1).

Full initiates acted as the person's spiritual guide towards the ultimate
goal of gnosis. Eventual initiation was dependent on evidence of gnosis.
To become an initiate one had to "no longer believe from human testimony
but from the Truth itself." (Fragments of Herakleon 39). To this end, much
of the training at the advanced stage of instruction would have likely
focused on meditation techniques. One the person had completed the
training and demonstrated evidence of gnosis, they would be initiated by
receiving the Valentinian baptism.

All Valentinians participated in the public life of the Catholic
congregation of which they also formed a part. Some even held
ecclesiastical offices. For example, Florinus was a presbyter at Rome
under bishop Victor around 200 AD. Ecclesiastical office was seen as
having a pedagogical role in regard to non-Valentinian Christians who were
seen as having attained to an psychic level of spiritual development and
therefore as dependent on outside instruction (Irenaeus Against Heresies
1:6:1, Herakleon 39). Ecclesiastical mediation of salvation was seen as a
first stage leading to possible eventual gnosis.

Divisions within a such diverse congregations sometimes arose which had to
be overcome. Using imagery drawn from Saint Paul, the teacher who wrote
the Interpretation of Knowledge describes the Church as the body of Christ
of which all are part, despite the different gifts they have received. The
author chastises Valentinian initiates for looking down on ordinary
Christians as "ignorant" (21:25) and treating them as "strangers"
(16:24f). He also criticizes those non-Valentinians who are jealous of
those who "make progress in the word" (16:31-33) rather than seeking to
participate in the other person's gift. Using the image from Saint Paul of
the Church as the body of Christ, he points out that every member of the
congregation is a vital part of that body. All members of the congregation
with their various gifts exist in a reciprocal relationship of taking and
giving . No member can exist alone. To cut one's self off from the body is
to be dead.

With a few exceptions, Valentinians were an accepted part of Christian
congregations until the fourth century. Gradually the views of extremists
such as Irenaeus and Tertullian prevailed and known Valentinians were
expelled from Catholic congregations. They continued to meet in secret but
increasingly they began to take on an identity as an independent sect.
Despite persecution, the Valentinian school is refered to in historical
records until at least the seventh century.





Content authored by David Brons

