The Gnostic Society Library

| Valentinus Index |  Gnostic Society Library | Gnosis Archive |



Sophia and Eve

The Valentinian myth of Sophia is often said to indicate the influence of
non-Christian sources on Valentinian teaching. In the myth, Sophia becomes
separated from her consort and is expelled from the heavenly Pleroma.
Christ then descends to her aid and she is joined to him. Rather than
having a non-Christian origin, the main points of the myth seem to be
derived from an allegorical interpretation of the Book of Genesis. In this
allegory, Eve is identified with Sophia while Adam is interpreted as
Christ.

The book of Genesis features two different accounts of the creation of
human beings. In the first, "God created human beings, making them to be
like himself. He created them male and female" (Genesis 1:27). In the
second account, "God took some soil from the ground and formed a man from
it" (Genesis 2:7). Then God creates woman from the man's rib (Genesis
2:22). The human beings are subsequently ejected from the garden.

Influenced by the writings of Plato, many Jews and Christians of the
period interpreted the creation as "male and female" to indicate that
humanity was originally androgynous (cf. Irenaeus Against Heresies
1:18:2).. As in Plato, the androgynous human being was later divided to
form two sexes. Valentinians made use of this interpretation in their myth
of Sophia. They explicitly identified Sophia (Wisdom), the youngest of the
Aeons with Eve, "mother of the living" (Hippolytus Refutation 6:29 cf.
Genesis 3:20). According to Valentinian teachers, the separation of
Sophia/Eve from her male counterpart results in her expulsion from the
heavenly Pleroma.

According to Valentinian teachers, the passage "In the image of God he
created them, male and female he created them" (Genesis1:27), means the
creation of the "spiritual humanity" (Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:18:2).
Specifically, "the 'male' are called angels, while the 'female' themselves
are the superior seed" (Excerpts of Theodotus 21,1). The 'male' are of
course Adam/Christ while the 'female' are of course Eve/Sophia.

The creation of Eve from Adam's rib is understood to mean that Eve has
become separated from him. In their interpretation, it is this separation
of Eve from Adam rather than the eating of the forbidden fruit which
constitutes the fall. The "sleep" of Adam (Genesis 2:21) is the sleep of
ignorance into which Sophia/Eve fell as a consequence of which she was
separated from him. According to the Interpretation of Knowledge, "From
being counted with the female (i.e.Eve), sleep brought labor and the
sabbath which is the world" (Interpretation of Knowledge 11:18-20 cf. Gen
3:17). As Ptolemy says, she "plunged forward and fell victim to suffering
without the embrace of her consort" (Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:2:2).

According to Valentinian myth, Sophia/Eve "cut herself off from her
consort"(Valentinian Exposition 34) and this results in the creation of
the material universe. Just as Sophia separated from her partner, "so also
in the case of Adam: the male remained in him, but the entire female seed
was taken from him and became Eve (i.e. Sophia), from whom the female
beings derive, as do the males from him. The males were drawn together
with the Word" (ExTheo 21:2-3).

The Gospel of Philip states that "Eve separated from Adam because she was
never united with him in the Bridal Chamber"(Gospel of Philip 70).
According to Valentinian myth of the fall, God held back perfect knowledge
(gnosis) of himself from his Aeons (including Sophia) so that they would
search for him. Until Chist manifested himself to them, the Aeons had not
united in the "bridal chamber", a metaphor for perfect knowledge of God.
It was as a result of this withholding of gnosis that the fall occured.

The separation of Sophia/Eve is described as the origin of our deficient
relationship with God. In Valentinianism deficiency or ignorance is
identical with spiritual death. According to the Gospel of Philip "When
Eve was still in Adam death did not exist. When she was separated from him
death came into being" (GP 63 cf. Genesis 3:19 see also Gospel of Philip
70). However, this allegory ends on an optimistic note. The passage in
Genesis that follows the separation of Eve from Adam describes how "a man
leaves his father and mother and is united with his wife and they become a
single flesh" (Genesis 2:24). According to the Valentinians, this "man" is
Christ who descends from the Fullness (pleroma) to unite with his partner
Sophia/Eve. As Theodotus says, "he came forth, full of the Aeons, as one
who proceeded from the All" (Excerpts of Theodotus 23,1).

Christ is the second Adam, who comes to undo the fall. According to the
Gospel of Philip, "Adam came into being from two virgins, from the Spirit
and from the virgin earth. Christ, therefore, was born of a virgin to
rectify the fall which occurred in the beginning" (Gospel of Philip 74).
Elsewhere in the same work, it says, "Christ came to came to repair the
separation which was from the beginning and again unite the two, and to
give Life to those who died as a result of the separation and unite them.
But the woman is united to her husband in the bridal chamber. Indeed,
those who have united in the bridal chamber will no longer be separated"
(Gospel of Philip 70)

The Gospel of Philip "if she (Sophia/Eve) enters into him and he takes her
to himself, death will no longer exist" (Gospel of Philip 63). Similarly,
according to the Exegesis on the Soul, "once they unite with one another,
they become a single life. Wherefore the prophet said concerning the first
man and woman, 'They will become a single flesh'. For they were originally
joined to one another when they were with the Father, before the woman led
astray the man, who is her brother" (Exegesis on the Soul 132:34-133:6).

The Interpretation of Knowledge contrasts the "sleep"(Genesis 2:21) of
ignorance which brings about the separation with the "sleep" of gnosis
which reverses it. According to this author, "From being counted with the
female (i.e.Sophia), sleep brought labor and the sabbath which is the
world. But from being counted with the Father, sleep brought the Sabbath
and the exodus from the world of the beasts" (Interpretation of Knowledge
11:18-22) It allows us to reverse the fall and "enter through the rib
whence you came" (Interpretation of Knowledge 10:34-35 cf Genesis
2:21-22).

Thus Sophia/Eve will be to be reunited with Christ/Adam and the fall
undone. Similarly, the female "seed" within each of us is to be reunited
with its male angelic counterpart. As Theodotus concludes in his
discussion of the separation of Adam and Eve, "the female . . . unites
itself with the angels and enters into the Fullness" (Excerpts of
Theodotus 21:3). Through gnosis, "we are raised equal to angels, restored
to the males, member to member, to form a unity" (Excerpts of Theodotus
22:2). Accordingly, "when Sophia (Wisdom) receives her consort and Jesus
receives the Christ and the seeds and the angels; then the Fullness will
receive Sophia (Wisdom) joyfully, and the All will come to be in unity and
reconciliation" (Valentinian Exposition 39)





Content authored by David Brons

