The Gnostic Society Library

| Valentinus Index |  Gnostic Society Library | Gnosis Archive |



Writings of the Valentinian School

(I would like to acknowledge the work of Gnosis Archive for making most of
these works available on-line.)

Valentinian writings can be divided into two broad groups:

1. Exoteric writings: These were works which were intended for wide
circulation and served to attract new students to the school.
2. Esoteric writings: These were intended only for initiates into the
school. Such works describe Valentinian speculation in full detail.

Many of the surviving writings of the Valentinian school are available
on-line, including:

Writings whose author is known
Anonymous writings
Writings under the name of a Biblical figure
Writings which may have Valentinian affinities
Non-Valentinian writings used by the schoool

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Valentinus

1. Gospel of Truth. A meditation on the Gospel. It offers a
demythologized version of his teaching and is intended for wide
circulation. Some scholars question whether the work is by Valentinus.
2. Psalms. Only one psalm entitled Summer Harvest survives.
3. Epistle to Agathopous. Only a single fragment survives. The work seems
to have dealt with Christology.
4. Epistle on Attachments. Only a single fragment survives. The work seem
to deal with the role of Christ in the salvation of the individual.
5. On Friends. Only a single fragment survives.
6. On the Three Natures. This work on the Trinity is lost.
7. Sophia. This esoteric work is lost.
8. Fragments. A collection of these fragmentary writing by Valentinus,
collected by Bentley Layton.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Ptolemy

1. Letter to Flora. A description of the position of the school on the
Law of Moses. It was widely circulated with the intention of
attracting people to the school.
2. A Doctrinal Treatise. This work is quoted in Irenaeus Against
Heresies. This is an esoteric work for full members of the school and
for instructional purposes.
3. Commentary on the Prologue of John. An esoteric commentary aimed at
full-fledged members of the school.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Herakleon

• Commentary on John. Herakleon (or, Heracleon) was the author of the
first commentary on the Gospel of John. It was intended for public
circulation and did much to enhance the reputation of the school.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Marcus

• Writings on Numerology These writings are preserved in Irenaeus
Against Heresies These writings were intended only for full members of
the school and may be quite confusing for modern readers.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Theodotus

• Excerpts of Theodotus (Excerpta ex Theodoto). A series of extracts
from the writings of Theodotus, preserved in the writings of Clement
of Alexandria.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Florinus

• On the Eight. This esoteric work does not survive.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Theotimus

• On the Images of the Law. This work does not survive.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Anonymous Valentinian Writings

1. Anonymous Roman School Treatise. It is preserved in Hippolytus'
Refutation of All Heresies This is an esoteric work which is sometimes
attributed to Herakleon.
2. Anonymous Doctrinal Epistle. This work is preserved in Epiphanius
Panarion. The text of second half of the work is badly corrupted.
3. Treatise on the Resurrection.This is a work intended for public
circulation. It is sometimes attributed to Valentinus.
4. A Valentinian Exposition. The text of this esoteric work is badly
damaged. It is sometimes attributed to Herakleon. The following
liturgical materials are appended to it:
On the Annointing
On Baptism A
On Baptism B
On the Eucharist A
On the Eucharist B
5. The Interpretation of Knowledge. This was a publicly circulated work
describing the Valentian theory of the Church. The text is in poor
condition.
6. Tripartite Tractate. An esoteric work sometimes incorrectly attributed
to Herakleon.
7. The Exegesis on the Soul. This is a publicly circulated work in which
the suffering of the ignorant soul is described in terms very similar
to the suffering of Sophia.
8. A Valentinian Liturgy. Excerpts from a bilingual Greek-Aramaic liturgy
are preserved in Irenaeus. This liturgy likely originates in Syria. It
is often attributed to the teacher Marcus.
9. Commentary on Romans. Fragments from this work are preserved by
Origen. It may have been written by by Herakleon.
10. A hymn to Sophia. A fragmentary hymn in Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 2074.
11. A post-initiation hymn Preserved in Papyrus Berlin 8299.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Valentinian Writings Under the Name of a Biblical Figure

1. Acts of John This is a collection of legends about the apostle
compiled by Leucius. It includes several prayers and a description of
the crucifixion which are generally regarded as being of Valentinian
origin.
2. The Gospel of Philip This is an anthology of Syrian Valentinian
sources. The title is secondary and seems to result from the fact that
Philip is the only apostle mentioned by name in the collection.
3. First Apocalypse of James This work descibes pre and post resurrection
conversations between Jesus and his brother James. It includes
excerpts from the Valentinian liturgy known to Irenaeus.
4. Second Apocalypse of James This work describes the martyrdom of James.
The work is generally seen as Valentinian in character.
5. Letter of Peter to Philip A possibly authentic apostolic letter with
an apocalypse appended to it. The work concerns post-resurrection
appearances of Jesus to the apostles in the form of a bright light.
6. Prayer of the Apostle Paul This is not a prayer attributed to Paul but
rather a prayer which invokes his authority. Valentinians saw Paul as
the ultimate founder of their school.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Writings Which May Have Valentinian Affinities

1. The Apocryphon of James This describes the final conversation Jesus
has with James and Peter before he ascends to heaven. Scholars are
sharply divided as to whether this work is Valentinian or Jewish
Christian in origin.
2. Authoritative Teaching This work is similar to the Exegesis on the
Soul. It uses a series of metaphors to describe the condition of the
soul. The teaching is consistent with a Valentinian origin.
3. Apocalypse of Peter This work describes conversations and visions
revealed by Jesus to Peter. The explicit criticism of Catholicism
indicates a relatively late date. The descriptions of the crucifixion
resemble those in the Acts of John.
4. Gospel of Mary This work describes a revelation by the risen Christ to
Mary Magdalen. The teaching is consistent with Valentinianism.
5. The Psalm of Christ This psalm is sometimes attributed to Valentinus.
Its use by "Naasenes" does not rule out a Valentinian origin. The
description of the suffering of the fallen soul in this psalm closely
resembles Valentinian description of the suffering of Sophia.
6. The "Naasene" Preaching This work is preserved in Hippolytus'
Refutation of All Heresies. The so-called Naasene Preaching makes use
of both Christian and pagan sources to support Gnostic Christian
views. The work is written in such a way as to obscure the underlying
system. The origin of the work is problematical. Despite what
Hippolytus says, the work does not seem to be of Naasene origin. Naas
(the serpent) is not even mentioned. Some scholars regard it as
Valentinian in character. References to the Thomas literature and
apocalypses of James seem to suggest that it was written in Syria.
7. The Teachings of Silvanus This work is Christian wisdom literature. It
contains some strong echoes of Valentinian teaching.
8. Acts of Thomas Of all of the Thomas literature, this work shows the
greatest influence of Valentinian ideas. The Wedding Hymn (6-7) seems
to assume a myth of Sophia which is absent in other Thomas writings.
One passage describes receiving knowledge of "who I was and who and
how I am now, that I may become again what I was"(15). The resemblance
to Theodotus' famous description of gnosis is clear: "who we are, what
we have become...whither are we hastening".
9. The Dialogue of the Savior A highly fragmentary dialog between Jesus
and his disciples.
10. Thunder: Perfect Mind A hymn in the form of a monologue by a female
divine figure who can be identified as Sophia. Much of the work
consists of paradoxical statements such as "I am the whore and the
holy one. I am the wife and the virgin. I am and the daughter." The
work seems to assume a distinction between a lower and higher Sophia
similar to that in Valentinian thought.
11. The Odes of Solomon Scholars are divided as to whether this collection
of hymns is Valentinian or Jewish Christian in origin. Some scholars
attribute these odes to Valentinus himself.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Non-Valentinian Writings Used by the School

1. The Gospel of Thomas A collection of sayings of Jesus which was widely
circulated in Syria and Egypt. Valentinus, Theodotus, Ptolemy and
Herakleon seem to have been familiar with many of these sayings in
some form.
2. Gospel of the Egyptians This work seems to have been a sayings gospel
similar to the Gospel of Thomas. It was used by Egyptian Christians
including Valentinians in the second and third century. Apart from a
few fragments, this work is now lost.
3. Proclamation of Peter This was a pseudonymous Christian apologetic
work which was widely circulated in the second century. It was used by
Herakleon in his Commentary on the Gospel of John. Several excerpts
from this work survive.
4. The Infancy Gospel of Thomas This is a collection of legends about the
childhood of Jesus. It was used by used by Marcus. The work was a
favorite of Catholics and survives virtually intact.
5. Allogenes A Sethian Gnostic work reputedly written by Mesos. It was
used by Adelphius and Aquilinus. It occurs bound together with seven
Valentinian works in Nag Hamadi Codex XI.
6. Apocalypse of Mesos A lost Sethian work used by Adelphius and
Aquilinus. It may have been similar in character to Allogenes which
was also supposedly written by Mesos.
7. Apocalypse of Nicotheus A lost work used by Roman Valentinians led by
Adelphius and Aquilinus. Nicotheus was widely revered as a prophet in
Sethian, Valentinian and Manichean circles.
8. Zostrianus A Sethian work used by Adelphius and Aquilinus. It occurs
together with a Valentinian work in Codex VIII at Nag Hammadi.
9. Apocalyse of Zoroaster A portion of this work survives in the long
version of the Apocryphon of John (NHC II 15:13-19:8). The surviving
excerpt describes the various powers responsible for the creation of
different portions of Adam's body. It may not be Gnostic in origin. It
was used by Sethian authors of the Apocryphon of John as well as
Valentinians such as Adelphius, Aquilinus and Prodicus.
10. Plato The writings of Plato were highly influential on Valentinus and
his followers.



Content authored by David Brons

