The Gnostic Society Library

| Valentinus Index |  Gnostic Society Library | Gnosis Archive |



Valentinians and the Jewish Temple

Valentinians draw on Jewish and early Christian speculation about a
heavenly temple corresponding to the one in Jerusalem. An example of such
speculation occurs in the Epistle of the Hebrews. April De Conick (1998)
in her paper "Esoteric Temple Traditions and Valentinian Worship"
postulates that Valentinian theological structures were developed from
such first century celestial temple traditions. This paper will examine
temple traditions in Valentinian sources and compare them to those in the
Epistle to the Hebrews.

The Epistle to theHebrews describes a heavenly temple which is "greater
and more perfect" than the temple in Jerusalem. For "it is not a man-made
tent, that is, it is not a part of this created world" (Hebrews 9: 11).
Like the earthly temple, this heavenly temple is divided into two parts by
a veil. The presence of God dwells in the inner part or "Holy of Holies".

According to Valentinians theologians, the divine Fullness (pleroma)
corresponds to the Holy of Holies in the Temple (Herakleon Fragment 13).
Like the Holy of Holies, the Pleroma is separated from the "outer tent"
(i.e. the cosmos) by a boundary or Limit which is often described as a
curtain or "veil". The Gospel of Philip compares the hidden nature of the
Pleroma to that of the Holy of Holies: "At the present time we have access
to the visible aspects of creation. We say that they are mighty and
glorious, but the hidden things are powerless and contemptible. Are the
hidden aspects of Truth like this? Are they powerless? Are they
contemptible? No, rather it is these hidden aspects that are mighty and
glorious. The mysteries of Truth are manifestly representations and
images. Thus the bridal chamber (i.e. Pleroma) remains hidden. It stands
for the Holy in the Holy." (Gospel of Philip 105)

Such ideas are linked to speculation about Christ as the High Priest.
According to Hebrews, "We have a High Priest who has gone into the very
presence of God -- Jesus, the Son of God" (Hebrews 4:14). He entered for
"once and for all into the Most Holy Place" (Hebrews 9:12). Similarly,
Valentinian theologians claimed that Jesus, "the joint fruit of the
Fullness" is the "great High Priest" (Hippolyus 6:27). He is "the
confirmation and the hypostatis of the All, the silent veil, the true High
Priest, the one who has the authority to enter the Holies of Holies,
revealing the glory of the Aeons and bringing forth the abundance to
fragrance....He is the one who revealed himself as the primal sanctuary
and the treasury of the All" (Valentinian Exposition 25-26).

According to the Epistle to the Hebrews, Jesus enables those who are
joined to him to enter the Holy of Holies. "We have then, my brothers,
complete freedom to go into the Most Holy Place (Holy of Holies) by means
of the death of Jesus. He opened for us a new way, through the curtain -
that is through his own body". (Hebrews 10:19-20). Christ provides an
opening through the curtain into the heavenly "Holy of Holies".

This theme was further developed by Valentinian theologians. According to
Herakleon, the Fullness is "the Holy of Holies, into which only the
High-Priest enters, into which the spiritual go" (Herakleon Fragment 13).
The Gospel of Philip links the opening provided by Christ with the tearing
of the veil at the time of Jesus' death (Matthew 27:51). According to
Philip,

"If others belong to the order of the priesthood they will be able to
enter within the veil with the High Priest. For this reason the veil was
not torn at the top only, since it would have been open only to those
above; nor was it torn at the bottom only, since it would have been
revealed only to those below. But rather it was torn from top to bottom.
The upper realm was opened to us in the lower realm, in order that we
may enter into the hidden realm of Truth....The Holies of the Holies was
uncovered, and the Bridal Chamber invites us in. " (Gospel of Philip
105).

The torn curtain symbolizes the opening in the boundary (limit) that
separates the Fullness/Holy of Holies from the lower universe through
which the redeemed can enter. "Thus its veil was torn from top to bottom
because certain people from below had to ascend." (Gospel of Philip 68)

Theodotus also describes how the spiritual enter the Fullness through the
"door" provided by Christ. According to Theodutus, "when he (Jesus) says,
'I am the door' (John 10:7), he means 'up to the Limit, where I am, you
will come, you who belong to the superior seed.' But when he himself
enters (the Fullness), then the seed also enters with him, united and
introduced through the 'door' (Excerpts of Theodotus 26:2-3). Those who
have the spiritual seed enter with Christ, the true High Priest, into the
Holy of Holies.

According to the Gospel of Philip, the redemption received through baptism
provides one with access to the Holy of Holies. "The 'Holy of Holies' is
the bridal chamber (i.e. the pleroma). Baptism possesses resurrection and
redemption. The redemption takes place in the bridal chamber. But the
bridal chamber is in that which is superior to it and the others, and you
will not find anything like it. Those who are familiar with it, are those
who worship in spirit and truth." (Gospel of Philip 68) Those who attain
to gnosis are enabled to enter the Holy of Holies to "worship in spirit
and truth."

According to the epistle to the Hebrews, the opening of a path into the
Holy of Holies corresponds to the destruction of the "outer tent". It
says, "the way into the Most Holy Place (Holy of Holies) has not been
opened as long as the outer tent still stands. This is a symbol which
points to the present time(aeon)" (Hebrews 9:8-9) Valentinians interpreted
the "outer tent" to be the cosmos. Thus the opening of a path into the
Pleroma corresponds to the destruction of the cosmos, for "originally the
veil concealed how God controlled the creation, but when the veil is torn
and the things inside are revealed, this house will be left desolate, or
rather it will be destroyed." (Gospel of Philip 105)

The purging of the "outer tent" is linked by Herakleon to Jesus' driving
of the money-changers from the temple (John 2:15-16).By the power of the
Holy Spirit and the Cross, symbolized by the whip used by Jesus, the
temple is purged. Herakleon says, "And the whip which Jesus made of small
cords and did not receive from another is an image of the power and energy
of the Holy Spirit which blows away the wicked. The whip and the linen and
the napkin and all such things form an image of the power and energy of
the Holy Spirit. . . The whip was tied to a piece of wood, and this wood
is a type of the Cross. On this wood the merchants who were intent on
gain, and all wickedness was nailed up and done away" (Herakleon Fragment
13).

According to Valentinian teaching, only those who attain gnosis enter the
Holy of Holies. They also taught that it was possible to attain to a lower
level of salvation outside of the Pleroma through faith and good works.
According to Herakleon, "The temple courtyard, where the Levites also
enter, is a symbol of the animate ones who attain a salvation outside the
Fullness (Pleroma)." (Herakleon Fragment 13). When the cosmos is
destroyed, those to have attained to the lower animate salvation will
remain outside of the Fullness, but will be protected by Limit (or
"Cross") from annihilation. According to the Gospel of Philip, "the whole
inferior deity will not flee from these places (the cosmos) into the
Holies of the Holies, for it will not be able to mix with the unmixed
Light and the flawless Fullness, but rather will remain under the wings of
the Cross and under its arms. This Ark will be its salvation when the
flood of water surges over them." (Gospel of Philip 105)

