The Gnostic Society Library

| Valentinus Index |  Gnostic Society Library | Gnosis Archive |



Valentinian Monism

Valentinianism is ussually classified as a form of Gnosticism. The term
'Gnosticism' was coined in the nineteenth century to describe a variety of
religious movements in the ancient world which have some common features.

Some consider "radical dualism" to be a characteristic feature of all
forms of Gnosticism (Jonas 1963). However, this generalization is simply
incorrect. As Elaine Pagels points out in her book The Gnostic Gospels,
"Valentinian gnosticism...differs essentially from dualism" (Pagels 1978).
Describing Gnostic systems such as Valentinianism as "dualist" has also
been subject to extensive criticism by Simon Petrement (1990). Indeed, it
has been recognized for some time that "a standard element in the
interpretation of Valentinianism and similar forms of Gnosticism is the
recognition that they are fundamentally monistic" (Schoedel 1980, see also
Petrement 1984, Dawson 1992). This article represents an attempt to
characterize Valentinian monism.

The Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy defines monism as describing
"philosophies which maintain that there is ultimately only one thing and
that the many are aspects of it, or to a more radical way of thinking,
simply an illusion resulting from our misperception of the One". As we
will see, this is an accurate description of Valentinianism.

Valentinian sources describe God as containing all things within himself.
An anonymous Valentinian quoted by Irenaeus claims that, "the Father of
all contains all things, and that there is nothing whatever outside of the
Pleroma..." (Irenaeus Against Heresies 2:4:2). Using virtually identical
language, another author argues that God "contains in himself all things
and is himself not contained" (Doctrinal Epistle quoted in Epiphanius
Panarion 31:5:3). A similar background can be seen Ptolemy's in
description of the Father as "uncontained" (Irenaeus Against Heresies
1:1:1).

Valentinus himself says describes the relationship of God to all other
things using similar language. He says that "the entirety was inside of
him--the inconceivable, uncontained, who is superior to all
thought."(Gospel of Truth 17:5-9) Elsewhere he describes God as "him who
surrounds every way while nothing surrounds him" (Gospel of Truth
22:22-26) According to the Valentinian Exposition found at Nag Hammadi,
"he possessed the All dwelling within him...He encompassed the All, he who
is higher than the All". Another author argues that, "in the Unbegotten
One, all things exist simultaneously" (Hippolytus Refutation of all
Heresies). The Gospel of Philip argues that "Christ has each within him,
whether human being or angel or mystery" (Gospel of Philip 56:14-15).

Such terminology is an extremely significant argument in favour of monism.
It implies that there is a single reality i.e. God who is "cause of the
generation of all created things" (Valentinan Treatise source quoted in
Hippolytus Refutation). All other things lie within him and continue to be
a part of him. According to the respected scholar of Gnosticism Bentley
Layton (1987), this sort of teaching implies a "cosmological
model...provided by Stoic pantheistic monism" in which "all is enclosed by
God and ultimately all is God". William Schoedel (1972, 1980) researched
the use of such topological language in Jewish, Christian and Gnostic
sources. He argues that "such theology presupposes a non-dualistic
cosmology; for it does not allow that the God who contains all things is
limited by any other reality" (Schoedel 1972).

This is in sharp contrast to Hans Jonas' characterization of Gnostic
teaching on the relationship of God to rest of reality . He claims that
"to the divine realm of light, self-contained and remote, the cosmos is
opposed as the realm of darkness" (Jonas 1963). As we can see, this is
inaccurate in the case of Valentinianism. The divine realm is not
"self-contained and remote". Rather it contains all things within itself
including the cosmos.

This is explicitly stated by the Valentinians who opposed Irenaeus: "In
the Fullness, or in those things that are contained by the Father, the
whole creation which we know to have been formed, having been made by the
Craftsman or by the angels. It is contained by the ineffable Greatness, as
the center is in a circle, or as a spot is in a garment." (Irenaeus
Against Heresies 2:4:2). All things continue to be a part of God despite
their apparent separation from him.

The fact that we have come forth within the Father does not imply that we
are acquainted with him. According to Valentinus, God is ultimately
responsible for the creation of all things "It is he who created the
entirety and the entirety is in him" (Gospel of Truth 19:8-9) However, the
"entirety" i.e. those within the Father "were unacquainted with the Father
since it was he whom they did not see"(Gospel of Truth 28:32-29:1). Being
only a small part of reality, they are unable to perceive it completely on
their own. In vain, "the entirety searched for the one from whom they had
emanated" (Gospel of Truth 17:4-6). It is something of a paradox that we
are within God, yet we do not recognize or know him. As Valentinus says,
"It was quite amazing that they were in the Father without being
acquainted with him and that they alone were able to emanate, inasmuch as
they were not able perceive and recognize the one in whom they were"
(Gospel of Truth 22:27-32)

Due to our ignorance of God we can fall into an erroneous or false
understanding of reality ("error" or "deficiency"). According to
Valentinus, "Ignorance of the Father caused agitation and fear. And the
agitation grew dense like fog, so that no one could see. Thus error found
strength" (Gospel of Truth 17:9-20). According to Valentinians, the
material universe that we perceive is an illusion deriving from our
ignorance of the Father. This is often expressed by Valentinians though
the story of Sophia. This myth describes Sophia's ignorance of God and the
suffering that results. It is the suffering that results from her error
that constitutes the material realm.

Valentinian sources occasionally describe the material realm as "outside"
of the Fullness. As Schoedel(1972) notes, "They insist that their local
language is relevant only epistemologically" and that it does not imply
that the material realm is outside of the Father. Instead, they claimed
that "what is without and what within (the Pleroma is) in reference to
knowledge and ignorance, and not with respect to local distance"
(Anonymous Valentinian quoted in Irenaeus Against Heresies 2:4:2). The
material realm of is a product of the Fullness and lies within it "as the
center is in a circle, or as a spot is in a garment" (Irenaeus Against
Heresies 2:4:2). As Schoedel (1980) observes, Irenaeus' Valentinian
opponents were willing to present "a resolutely monistic interpretation of
their theology and to stress the epistomological significance of the
spatial language of their mythology. They could imagine a realm of
'vacuity and shadow' within the Father presumably because it was felt to
be epiphenomenal to the reality of spirit".

As Layton (1987) points out, the Valentinian teaching exemplified by the
Gospel of Truth "is strongly anti-materialist, even illusionist, as
regards the reality of material structures". Valentinus describes the
"realm of appearance" as an bad dream as "when one falls asleep and finds
one's self in the midst of nightmares" (Gospel of Truth 29:8-10f). The
author of the Treatise on Resurrection similarly describes the material
world as follows, "Suddenly the living are dying - surely they are not
alive at all in this world of apparition! - the rich have become poor,
rulers overthrown: all changes, the world is an apparition" (Treatise on
Resurrection 48:19-27cf Irenaeus Against Heresies 2:14).

In contrast to the reality of the Father, "those things which are
'outside' of the Fullness have no true existence... These things are
images of those which truly exist." (Irenaeus Against Heresies 2:14:3).
The things we perceive in the physical world are often described as
"images" or "shadows" of the divine realm. (Valentinian Exposition
36:10-13, Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:5:1,2:6:3, etc.) This is a reference
to the famous Platonic parable which compares the physical world to
shadows cast on the back wall of a cave. God is the only reality. However,
we who are ignorant of the true situation mistake the shadows for reality.
We construct an illusory false reality for ourselves because we are
ignorant of the overall picture.

Even though physical things are seen as an image of the divine,
Valentinians believed that one can get only an incomplete understanding of
God as reflected in the physical realm. The name used to describe this
imperfect image of God is the 'Craftsman' (demiurge). The Craftsman is God
understood as the creator of the material realm and as a law-giver.
However, Valentinian tradition makes clear that this is only an inferior
image of the true God. According to the teacher Marcus, the Craftsman
"could not express its (the divine) permanence and eternity because he was
an offspring of deficiency" (Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:17:2).

It is due to our ignorance of the true nature of reality that we believe
that things can be separated into opposites. This is discussed in the
Gospel of Philip: "Light and darkness, life and death, right and left are
mutually dependent; it is impossible for them to separate. Accordingly the
'good' are not good, the 'bad' are not bad, 'life' is not life, 'death' is
not death." (Gospel of Philip 53:14-23). Categories that are considered as
opposites are in fact closely related and one cannot be understood without
the other. This is expressed in Valentinianism through the notion of the
syzygy (pair). The term refers to the linking together of complementary
qualities ("Aeons") of to form a state of wholeness (pleroma). This is the
highest level of reality. The halves of a syzygy are often referred to as
male and female. The male corresponds to form and the female corresponds
to substance. There can be no concept of maleness without femaleness or no
concept of darkness without light. Dualistic distinctions between "body"
and "mind", "soul" and "matter" are meaningless. All things are ultimately
one.

Just as the illusion arose as result of ignorance, it will be dissolved
through knowledge (gnosis). Upon knowledge (gnosis) of God, the world of
multiplicity vanishes. As an anonymous source puts it, "Since deficiency
and suffering had their origin in ignorance, the entire system originating
in ignorance is dissolved by knowledge (gnosis)" (Irenaeus Against
Heresies 1:21:4 cf. also Irenaeus Against Heresies 2:4:3). The illusion of
multiplicity vanishes once the person knows the true reality. According to
Valentinus, "Inasmuch as the lack came into being because the Father was
not known, from the moment the Father is known, the lack will not
exist...lack passes away in completion, and so from that moment on, the
realm of appearance is no longer manifest but will pass away in the
harmony of unity...It is by acquaintance (gnosis) that all will purify
themselves out of multiplicity into unity, consuming matter within
themselves as fire" (Gospel of Truth 24:28-25:19 cf. also Treatise on
Resurrection 48:38-49:4, Valentinus Fragment 4). The material world is an
illusion that is dissolved by knowledge (gnosis) of God.

Not only does the realm of multiplicity pass away through knowledge
(gnosis), so does the distinction between the self and God. To know God is
to be God. According to the Gospel of Philip, "People cannot see anything
in the real realm unless they become it...if you have seen the spirit, you
have become the spirit; if you have seen Christ, you have become Christ;
if you have seen the Father, you will become the Father" (Gospel of Philip
61:20-32 cf. 67:26-27). It represents a restoration to the syzygy, that
is, the reestablishment of the link between the self and the divine.

Once you understand that reality, your perception of multiplicity is gone.
The duality vanishes since it was never really there in the first place.
According to the Gospel of Philip, "The world has already become the
eternal realm (Aeon), for to this person the eternal realm is Fullness. As
such, it is manifest to him or her alone, not hidden in the darkness and
the night, but hidden in perfect day and holy light" (Gospel of Philip) It
implies that for the person who has gnosis, there is no longer any
distinction between the world and the Pleroma. Through gnosis one can
participate in and experience the divine realm. As a result, "the
Valentinian and his or her world have been completely absorbed by the
divine fullness or entirety" (Dawson 1992).

The entire process of emanation from the Father, fall into illusion and
restoration through gnosis takes place within the Godhead. As Dawson
(1992) points out, "the patterns and sequences of nature and history now
unfold simultaneously within the mind of God and the minds of the
Valentinians". The reception of gnosis brings the dissolution of the world
for the individual, such that "the apocalypse now takes place not in
history but in the mind...in contrast to the dissapointment of history,
and its division, struggle, fear and evil, the emanated Son brings the
message that, despite all appearances to the contrary, reality is good..."
(Dawson 1992) .

It is worth noting that Valentinianism shows an astonishing degree of
similarity to another monistic system, the Advaita Vedanta school of
Indian philosophy. In Advaita, the material world is an illusion (maya)
attributed to ignorance (avidya) of the true reality. Through knowledge
(jnana) of the ultimate reality (brahman), the world of multiplicity
vanishes. True redemption (moksha) is the knowledge of one's true nature.

This raises the intriguing possibility of some kind of connection between
the two. There was some awareness of Indian thought in the ancient Roman
world. However, at the time of Valentinus, there was no systematic
statement of Advaita thought. It is possible that Valentinus came into
contact with some form of early Advaita Vedanta teaching. Advaita
philosophy as it now stands was given its definitive form by Shankara in
the 6th or 7th century AD. There also exists the possibility that he was
influenced by Valentinian thought. Valentinians are known to have been
active in the Middle East as late as the seventh century. It is possible
that Valentinian missionaries or refugees may have made their way to India
and come into contact with Shankara or his immediate predecessors.
However, any connection between the two remains purely hypothetical.

