The Gnostic Society Library

| Valentinus Index |  Gnostic Society Library | Gnosis Archive |



The Valentinian View of the Creation

Introduction

The Valentinians had a very distincitive view of the material creation.
Unlike other Gnostics, they saw the creation of the material world as part
of the process of redemption. It was seen as instrumental in the
destruction of the deficiency and the restoration of the fallen spiritual
element to the divine fullness (pleroma). This viewpoint had certain
ethical consequences which serve to further distinguish them from their
Gnostic contemporaries.

The Fall and the Emanation of the Three Substances

In the Valentinian view, human beings consist of three components. Each
person has a material body, an animating soul, and a spirit. Similarly,
the cosmos itself is viewed as having a tripartite structure. It too is
said to consist of spirit (pneuma), soul (psyche) and matter
(hyle).Valentinians trace this tripartite structure back to the origin of
the cosmos. According to their creation myth, the cosmos has its origins
from the fall and redemption of the divine emanation (Aeon) Sophia or
"Wisdom". Sophia attempted to know the Father through thinking alone and
as a result she was excluded from the divine Fullness (pleroma) and fell
into ignorance and suffering. She repented of her actions and began to
plead for assistance. The Father had mercy on her and sent Christ to her
and she attained knowledge (gnosis) of the Father. Sophia's fall,
repentance and redemption are said by Valentinian writers to give rise to
the three constituents of the universe. Matter (hyle) is said to originate
from her suffering, soul (psyche) from her repentance, and spirit (pneuma)
from her gnosis (Against Heresies 1:2:3, 1:4:1-5, 1:5:4 cf. also
Refutation of Heresies 6:25-27, Excerpts of Theodotus 43:2-46:1, etc.).

Spirit is destined to attain salvation and reenter the presence of God
along with Christ and Sophia. Matter or the "left" has no share in
salvation and is dissolved by gnosis. Soul or the "right" is intermediate
between matter and spirit and is characterized by free will and is capable
of partial salvation (Excerpts of Theodotus 56:3).

The Valentinian view of matter seems to indicate a fundamentally
pessimistic view of material existence. However, as we shall see, this is
far from the whole story.

The Creation

During her fall and redemption by Christ, Sophia gave rise to unformed
spiritual substance (pneuma). She was unable to form it herself. Therefore
she was required to find a place for it to grow to maturity. This place is
the material world. Thus in Valentinian thought, the creation of the world
is instrumental in the process of redemption. As Hans Jonas (1963)
succinctly puts it, "this fruit of hers had therefore to pass into and
through the world to be 'informed' in its course. The Demiurge is an
unwitting instrument in this process".

As Jonas indicates, Sophia was not regarded as having created the world
directly. Rather she acted through the Demiurge and the lower powers. The
Demiurge mediates between Sophia and matter in much the same way that the
soul mediates between the spirit and matter within the individual person
and allows the creation of the material world. The Demiurge is "the god
through whom she (Sophia) made the heaven and the earth (Excerpts of
Theodotus 47:2). Sophia "uses him as a hand, to beautify and work on the
things below"(Tripartite Tractate 100:31-33). Though him she shaped matter
into an image of the Fullness in order to provide a place for the seed to
"grow and increase in it, and so become suitable for the reception of
perfect Word" (Against Heresies 1:5:6). Note that the substance of the
world (i.e. matter) is viewed negatively but its form contains images of
pleroma and thus makes it suitable place for the seed to grow to maturity.

The ultimate purpose of this process is the creation of human beings
(Tripartite Tractate 104:18-30). Sophia used the Demiurge to create human
beings consisting of a material body and a soul. Into each soul she sows
the spiritual seed. Thus every human being is a microcosm consisting of
all three substances: matter, soul and spirit (Against Heresies 1:5:6,
Excerpts of Theodotus 53:2, Valentinian Exposition 37, Tripartite Tractate
105:29-35).

Purpose of the Creation

The human body is created in order to serve as a vessel in which the
spiritual seed will grow to maturity. This is the main purpose of the
Demiurge. According to Ptolemy, the spiritual element "was secretly
deposited in him (the Demiurge), so that it might be sown by him into the
soul that comes from him and into this material body; might be carried by
these (as it were by a pregnant woman), and increase; and might become
ready for the reception of the perfect Word" (Against Heresies 1:5:6). As
Herakleon says, it is the Demiurge and "the angels of the dispensation,
through whom - as mediators - it (the seed) was sown and brought up"
(Herakleon Fragment 36).

The seed is "being trained and nourished here since it was sent out in
immaturity, but was later deemed worthy of perfection" (Against Heresies
1:7:5). As the Tripartite Tractate says, "the entire preparation of the
adornment of the images and representations and likenesses, have come into
being because of those who need education and teaching and formation, so
that the smallness might grow, little by little, as through a mirror
image. For it was for this reason that he created mankind at the end,
having first prepared and provided for him the things which he had created
for his sake" (TriTract 104:18-30). The world has been formed into an
image of the Pleroma and human being were created to serve as a vessel in
which the seed may attain to maturity. Valentinians believed that the
spiritual "fruit of hers (i.e. Sophia) had therefore to pass into and
through the world to be 'informed' in its course" (Jonas 1963).

The attaining of maturity by the seed is linked to it receiving form. The
seeds are described as "immature" or "unformed" when sent out for
"training" in the world. According to Ptolemy, "the spiritual substance
has been sent forth so that it might be formed by being coupled with the
animate (psychic) and learning along with it during its time of residence
in this place" (Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:6:1). Similarly, according to
Theodotus, "From the three species (sown in humanity) there takes place
both the formation of the spiritual substance and the changing of the
substance of soul from slavery to freedom." (Excerpts of Theodotus 57:1).

Herakleon describes how Christ comes to "harvest" the souls of believers.
He says, "The harvest is of the souls of believers. They are already ripe,
ready for harvest, and suitable for being gathered into the barn, that is,
through faith into rest, all those who are ready. For they are not all
ready. Some were already ready, some were on the point of being ready,
some are near to being ready, and some are still being sown" (Her Frag
32). Through the activity of Christ, the seed "is being gradually given
form through knowledge (gnosis)" (Excerpts of Theodotus 59:1).
Furthermore, "so long as the seed is unformed, it is a child of female
(alone). But when it is formed, it becomes male and becomes a bridegroom's
attendant. No longer weak and subject to the cosmic powers, visible and
invisible, but, having become (joined to the) male, it becomes an
imperishable fruit" (Excerpts of Theodotus 79:1).

Other Valentinian sources describe this process in a slightly different
manner. As described above, matter is identical with the fallen state or
"deficiency." The material body into which each seed is sown represents
their share of "deficiency" or "death". This is what Valentinus refers to
when he addresses the elect: "From the beginning you have been immortal
and you are children of eternal life. And you wanted death to be allocated
to yourselves so that you might spend it and use it up, and that death
might die in you and through you. For when you nullify the world and are
not yourselves annihilated, you are lord over creation and all corruption"
(Valentinus Fragment 4). The matter of which the world was formed is
regarded as identical with ignorance or "death". By entering the world,
the seeds each are allocated a share of death or deficiency. It is their
mission to "spend" and "use up" their share of death and thereby "nullify
the world." Gnosis represents the destuction of lack and therefore of
matter. As Valentinus elsewhere describes, "Inasmuch as the lack came into
being because the Father was not known, from the moment the Father is
known, the lack will not exist...lack passes away in completion, and so
from that moment on, the realm of appearance is no longer manifest but
will pass away in the harmony of unity...It is by acquaintance (gnosis)
that all will purify themselves out of multiplicity into unity, consuming
matter within themselves as fire" (Gospel of Truth 24:28-25:19).

Just as the Demiurge created our material bodies out of matter or dust
(chous), the gnosis brought by Christ removes the matter or dust from us.
Theodotus describes how Christ aids us in the desctuction of our inner
ignorance or "dust" (chous). According to him, "When the Savior came, he
awakened the soul, but kindled the spark...And after the resurrection when
he breathed his spirit into the apostles, he blew away the dust (chous)
like ashes and removed it, but he kindled and made alive the spark."
(Excerpts of Theodotus 3:1-2) Theodotus compares our reception of Christ's
spirit to blowing on the embers of a fire. The Holy Spirit removes the
"dust" or ignorance and awakens the spiritual spark.

Thus the creation can be understood as a mechanism by which lack and
matter are gradually destroyed. As each person attains to gnosis, the lack
and matter within them is destroyed and the universe is one step closer to
reintegration with the pleroma. Eventually all of the ignorance will be
used up and the world will be destroyed. As Ptolemy says, "the end is
supposed to come when every spiritual element has been formed and
perfected in acquaintance (gnosis)" (Against Heresies 1:6:1). Once all the
ignorance will has been "used up", the matter of which the world is
composed will cease to exist. According to Ptolemy, "The fire which is
hidden in the world will blaze up and ignite, annihilate all matter, and
consume itself also at the same time, and pass into nothingness" (Against
Heresies 1:7:1 cf 1:6:1). With the deficiency eliminated, Sophia along
with the seed will be readmited to the divine pleroma (Against Heresies
1:7:1 cf Excerpts of Theodotus 64:1). As Ptolemy says, "what leads them to
the Fullness is the seed which was sent forth from there before it was
mature, but attained to perfection here" (Against Heresies 1:6:4)

Consequences

This view of the world is not without ethical consequences. Entering the
world is viewed positively in Valentinianism. It was seen as a necessary
step towards receiving gnosis and returning to the pleroma. With this in
mind, Valentinian teachers vigorously defended marriage and raising
children. Ptolemy, an important teacher of the Valentinian school at Rome
says of marriage: "Whoever has been in the world and has not loved a woman
in such a way as to unite himself with her (i.e. marry her) is not from
the Truth and will not attain to the Truth"! (Against Heresies 1:6:4).
Similarly, the teacher Theodotus argues that marriage and rearing children
"is indispensable for the salvation of those who believe - for this
child-bearing is essential until the previously reckoned seed is brought
forth" (Excerpts of Theodotus 67:2-3). It is quite easy to see that the
Valentinian view on marriage is a logical consequence of their teaching on
the creation. If entering the world is the path to salvation for the
spiritual element then the means by which this occurs (i.e marriage and
child-bearing) must be viewed positively. For this reason Clement of
Alexandria saw the Valentinians as allies against those who reject
marriage (Stromata 3:1) despite his opposition to other aspects of their
theology.

Such an attitude towards marriage and childbirth sharply contrasts with
other Gnostics who condemned marriage and child-bearing. Those Gnostics
who rejected marriage and reproduction saw the created world in purely
negative terms as the end results of the fall. Valentinians in contrast
saw the creation of the world as part of the process of redemption and
consequently had a less negative view towards it. Rather than being the
nadir of the fall into ignorance, the creation is the way back from the
fall. It is created specifically as a place for the spiritual seeds to
attain to gnosis. The attainment of gnosis also corresponds to the
destruction of ignorance and lack as well as their concrete manifestation
i.e. matter. Thus the world is also a mechanism for the destruction of
ignorance and matter.

Valentinians agreed with Plato that the form of the created world
preserved the image of the ideal realm (the pleroma). For this reason they
rarely criticisize the form of the world. Instead most of their criticism
is focused on the world's material substance. In their view, the matter of
which the world is formed is condensed or solidified deficiency and
suffering. Thus while the world preserves the image of the pleroma, it is
inevitably deficient on account of its substance. Valentinians could
therefore appreciate that which was beautiful about the world while
criticisizing that which was ugly.

Conclusion

The view of the created world is quite different in Valentinianism than in
most other forms Gnosticism. According to Valentinian teaching, the world
is created to aid the spiritual element to return to the Fullness
(pleroma). Its creation was necessitated by the primordial fall into
ignorance and suffering. While the Valentinian view of the world is not
altogether positive, it resulted in a positive view of marriage and
reproduction.

Bibliography



R. P. Casey, 1934. The Excerpta ex Theodoto of Clement of Alexandria,
Chistophers, London.

Hans Jonas, 1963. The Gnostic Religion: The Message of the AlienGod
Boston: Beacon.

Bentley Layton, 1987. The Gnostic Scriptures . Garden City, NY:Doubleday &
Co.

James M. Robinson, ed., 1977. The Nag Hammadi Library in English. NewYork:
Harper and Row



Content authored by David Brons

