The Gnostic Society Library

| Valentinus Index |  Gnostic Society Library | Gnosis Archive |



Valentinian Theology

The Father

Valentinus and his followers believed that God, the supreme Father is
"uncontained, incomprehensible and cannot be seen or heard" (Against
Heresies 1:2:5). Therefore he defies accurate description. He is infinite,
without beginning or end and is the ultimate origin of all things. He
encompasses all things without being encompassed (Ep5:3, Gospel of Truth
18:34, Valentinian Exposition 22:27-28, Against Heresies 2:2:2).
Everything including the world lies within the Father and continues to be
part of him. God manifests himself through a process of self-unfolding in
the subsequent multiplicity of being while maintaining his unity.

All Valentinians agree that God incorporates both masculine and feminine
characteristics. This is in opposition to traditional Jewish and orthodox
Christian descriptions of God in exclusively masculine terms. According to
most sources, the Father (or Parent)can be understood as a male-female
dyad. This is related to the notion that God provides the universe with
both form and substance.

The aspect through which the Father provides the universe with substance
can be understood as feminine. In this aspect he is called Silence, Grace
and Thought. Silence is God's primordial state of tranquillity
(Valentinian Exposition 22:24) and self-awareness (Excerpts of Theodotus
7:1). She is the active creative Thought that makes all subsequent states
of being (or "Aeons") substantial.

The masculine aspect of God which gives the universe form is called by the
names Ineffable, Depth and First Father. Depth is the profoundly
incomprehensible, all-encompassing aspect of the deity. According to some
sources, he is essentially passive. Only when moved to action by his
feminine Thought, does he gives the universe form. (cf. Epiphanius
Panarion 5:3)

The anonymous author summarized by Hippolytus and the author of the
Tripartite Tractate emphasize the unity of the Father. They point out that
these two aspects of the deity are not truly separate entities. They exist
as simultaneous states of being within the Godhead (cf. Refutation of
Heresies 30:8). They are like two sides of a coin or like water and
wetness. They are inseparable and one cannot be understood without the
other. For this reason these two authors describe God in more strongly
unitary terms.

The Son

The origin of the universe is described as a process of emanation of
subsequent states of being from the Godhead. According to the sources, in
the beginning, there was nothing at all created and the Father rested in
himself as an inert unitary being (Refutation of Heresies 29:5, Against
Heresies 1:1:1, Authoritative Teaching 25:27-34). The universe existed
only as a potential, not in actuality. As one source puts it, "the
self-begotten contained in himself everything, which was in him in
unawareness" (Panarion 5:3 cf. also Valentinian Exposition 22:27-28,
Tripartite Tractate 60:1-34).

The creative process entails self-limitation on the part of the Godhead.
In order that subsequent states of being (Aeons) remain separate from him,
the Father created a boundary or Limit (Against Heresies 1:2:1,
Valentinian Exposition 27:36-37). It is the power of Limit which
"consolidates the All and keeps it outside of the Ineffable Greatness"
(Against Heresies 1:2:2). The Limit, also called the Cross, has two
functions. It separates the spiritual world (or "Fullness") from the
Father and provides these things with strength (Against Heresies 1:2:1).

This accomplished, the Father then was able to manifest himself in a
comprehensible form through a process of emanation. Theodotus describes
this process in the following words, "Through his own Thought as the one
who knew himself, he (the Father) brought forth the spirit of knowledge,
which is in knowledge, the Only-Begotten (Son)" (Excerpts of Theodotus
7:1).

This offspring is the "Only Begotten Son". Like God, the Son is also
androgynous and generally understood as a male-female dyad. The masculine
aspect or Aeon of the Son is referred to as Only-Begotten, Mind and Father
of All. His feminine aspect is called Truth and Mother of All. They
represent how truth can only be comprehended by the truly conscious mind.
The Son is the Beginning of all things that follow (cf. John 1:1). The
Father and the Son, are sometimes referred to as the original Four since
they both can be understood as dyads (i.e. Depth, Silence, Mind and
Truth).

The Son (i.e. Mind and Truth) is the comprehensible image of the
incomprehensible aspects of God (Against Heresies 1:12:1, Tripartite
Tractate 66:13-15). It is only through his mediation that we can know the
supreme deity, since "He who came forth from knowledge, that is, from the
Father's thought became himself knowledge, that is, the Son, because
'through the Son the Father is known'" (Excerpts of Theodotus 7:1 cf. Matt
11:27)

The relationship between the Father and the Son can be compared to the
relationship between the human mind and the unconscious. It must be noted
that the Son is encompassed or lies within the Father.

The Aeons

Inspired by the Father, the androgynous Son then began a process of making
manifest the energies immanent within his personality. To this end, he
emanated four more Aeons (i.e. two more male-female pairs). The first pair
consisted of Word (male) and Life (female). They were generated in the
image of Depth and Silence (Valentinian Exposition 29:25-37) and represent
how true life originates from the divine utterance. The second pair
consisted of Humanity (male) and Church (female). They were created in the
image of Mind and Truth (Valentinian Exposition 29:25-37) and represent
the natural state of humanity conjoined to the church.

According to Ptolemy and Theodotus, these four aspects of the Son's
personality are referred to explicitly in the prologue to the fourth
Gospel. Where John says, "The Word existed in the Beginning" (John 1:1),
they claimed he was referring to Mind and Truth. He refers to the pair
Word and Life when he says, "What was made had Life in union with the
Word" (John 1:4). When John says, "Life was the light of human beings"
(John 1:4), they claimed that he was referring to Humanity and the Church
(Against Heresies 1:8:5, Excerpts of Theodotus 6:1-3).

The original Four and these four secondary Aeons are sometimes
collectively referred to as the "original Eight". The Eight are the "root
and substance of all things" (Against Heresies 1:1:1). All other things
have their origins from them. The nature and function of these Aeons can
be compared with the role of the sefiroth in Jewish Kabalism. The Eight
are complete in themselves - a fullness within the Fullness.

The first movements of life within the hidden recesses of deity give birth
to the Son who manifests himself as the ideal forms of all rational life-
Mind, Truth, Word, Life, Humanity, Church. These must first exist in God
and evolve in the divine self-consciousness as the essential and primary
functions in the inner life of deity. They are also the patterns or models
of life in this world.

Subsequently, eighteen less important Aeons were brought forth, ten from
Word and Life and twelve from Humanity and Church. They represent an
further unfolding and manifestation of characteristics immanent within the
Son.

The ten Aeons Word and Life brought forth were in honour of Depth and
Silence (Panarion 5:9, Refutation of Heresies 30:1, Valentinian Exposition
30:16-19). Their names are:
male female
Deep------------Mingling
Unaging---------Union
Self-Begotten----Pleasure
Immovable-------Mixture
Only-Begotten*--Blessed(Unity)
* not to be confused with Only-Begotten Mind!

The ten Aeons represent cosmological principals which are necessary as a
basis of ethical life. Note the linking of male terms denoting stability
with female terms relating to sexuality. This joining together of
complementary qualities represents the ideal state of being.

The twelve Aeons generated by Humanity and Church were in honour of Mind
and Truth (Refutation of Heresies 30:1). Their names are given as:
male female
Consoler---------Faith
Paternal---------Hope
Maternal---------Love
Ever-flowing-----Understanding
Ecclesiastical---Blessedness
The Ordained-----Wisdom(Sophia)

The Twelve represent the qualities of the perfected humanity which
Christianity is destined to produce.

Altogether there are thirty Aeons or divine attributes divided into three
groups: Eight, Ten and Twelve. They represent the manifestation or
unfolding of different aspects of the Son's nature. This process of
self-unfolding of the divine Fullness can be compared to the growth of a
tree from a seed (Refutation of Heresies 8:2-5, Against Heresies 2:17:6,
Tripartite Tractate 60:31-32) or to the sending forth of rays of light
from the sun. (Against Heresies 2:13:5, 2:17:7). Valentinians conceived of
the universe in terms of a series of concentric spheres. Just as the Son
lies enclosed within the Father, the Fullness of Aeons is enclosed within
the Son.

Thus, even in the multiplicity of Aeons, the unity of the Godhead is
maintained. As one ancient writer says, "All are formed of the same
substance with the Father, differing from one another in size and not in
nature, and filling up the Greatness of the Father, even as the fingers
complete the hand." (Against Heresies 2:17:6). They remain one while
manifesting themselves as a plurality.

In the Gospel of Truth, the Son is described as the Name of God. This
theme is developed further by Marcus who identifies the thirty Aeons as
the letters that make up the Name. Individually they are incomplete but
together they constitute the complete Name (Marcus Against Heresies
1:14:1). Similarly, the Aeons only together constitute the complete
Fullness of the Godhead (i.e. the Son).

According to Marcus, each of the thirty Aeons contain further Aeons and
each of these further Aeons contain further Aeons to form an inifinite
number of Aeons. To illustrate this he makes use of the metaphor of the
Aeons as letters of the Name. The Name consists of "thirty letters, while
each of these letters, again, contains other letters in itself, by means
of which the name of the letter is expressed. And thus, again, others are
named by other letters, and others still by others, so that the multitude
of letters swells out into infinitude" (Against Heresies 1:14:2). Using
the Greek letter delta as an example, it can be written by means of five
letters (d, e, l, t, a). Each of these letters is expressed by further
letters, to infinity. The Fullness of Aeons corresponds to the Platonic
world of ideas.

This spiritual realm represents a Christian ideal and furnishes a model
for the life of this world. The Eight represent the great conceptions
which underlie all rational life. The Ten represent the stability and
unity of the Godhead. The Twelve represent the virtues produced by the
perfected humanity through union with the Church. The life of each of the
Aeons is perfected only through membership in the Fullness as a whole. At
this point, the 26 Aeons produced by the Son are psychologically distinct
entities. They represent unintegrated elements of the Son's personality.



The Myth of the Fall of Wisdom (Sophia) & The Aeons Seek to Know the Father

The Son alone had perfect knowledge of the supreme Father (cf.. John 1:18,
Matthew 11:27). To all of the other Aeons he remained invisible and
inconceivable. (Against Heresies 1:2:1, 1:14:1, Valentinian Exposition
24:25-39, Gospel of Truth 22:27-29, Excerpts of Theodotus 7:1). Saint Paul
refers to this when he discusses "the mystery hidden from the ages (Aeons)
in God" (Ephesians 3:9, cf.. also Romans 16:25, Colossians 1:26). This
situation is a natural consequence of the process of self-limitation by
which the Aeons were produced. They could not continue to exist otherwise
(Tripartite Tractate 64:28-37). The Aeons can only know God through the
mediation of the Son.

All of the Aeons longed to know the one from whom they came forth.
Valentinus describes this in the Gospel of Truth, "The All went about
searching for the one from whom they had come forth, and the All was
inside of him, the incomprehensible, inconceivable one who is superior to
every thought." (Gospel of Truth 17:4-9)

According to Valentinus, the search of the Aeons for the Father led
inevitably to disaster. According to him, "ignorance of the Father caused
agitation and fear. And the agitation grew dense like a fog, so that no
one could see. Thus error found strength...Without having learned to know
the truth, she took up residence in a modeled form (a material body),
preparing by means of the power, in beauty, a substitute for the truth"
(Gospel of Truth 17:10-13). This "substitute for the truth" is the
material universe and human beings are the Aeons who have fallen into
error and taken up residence in a "modelled form" (i.e. a human body).

The Fall of Wisdom

Valentinians made use of the myth of Wisdom (Sophia) as a metaphor to
describe the this fall into error. According to this myth, the longing to
know the Father passed to Wisdom, the youngest of the Twelve. On behalf of
the whole Fullness, she took up the quest to know the supreme Parent.
However, she attempted to know God without the mediation of the Son ,
something that is impossible. As a result of this defective way of
thinking, she became separated from her consort and fell into a state of
error and suffering (Against Heresies 1:2:2-3, Excerpts of Theodotus 31:3,
Tripartite Tractate 75:17-77:37). The separation of Eve from Adam in the
book of Genesis (Genesis 2:21-22) is interpreted by Valentinian teachers
as an allegorical representation of Wisdom's separation from her consort
(Excerpts of Theodotus 21:1, Gospel of Philip 68:22-25 70:9f,
Interpretation of Knowledge 11:17f)

Wisdom's defective Thinking is described as an abortion which she produced
because "she wished to be like the Father" (Refutation of Heresies 30:6).
In attempting to know the Father, she was, in a way, trying to bring him
forth. However, all she brought forth was the defective Thinking which is
described as an "abortion". (Against Heresies 1:2:1). In her ignorance,
Wisdom suffered grief, fear and confusion.

In her distress, she repented and began to plead for help. The other Aeons
were also distressed and joined her petition (Against Heresies 1:2:3,
Refutation of Heresies 31:2, Valentinian Exposition 34:25-31). By means of
a second boundary or Limit, she was divided into a higher and lower self.
Her lower self (the "abortion") along with the suffering were excluded
from the Fullness. The higher Wisdom was strengthened and returned to her
consort convinced that God is unknowable (Against Heresies 1:2:4, cf..
Refutation of Heresies 31:5)

Wisdom's actions served to externalize and separate the defect inherent in
the Fullness. The "abortion" is an expression of the desire shared by all
of the Aeons for knowledge of the Parent. The net result of this process
is that the lower Wisdom (i.e. the aborted Thinking) was trapped outside
the Fullness in a lower realm of ignorance and suffering. This process is
in accord with what is ordained by the Father (Tripartite Tractate
76:24-77:1). This the reason Wisdom's consort is called the Ordained.

The Unification of the Aeons

In order that this sort of crisis would never happen again, the Son
manifested himself to the other Aeons in the form of Christ (male) and the
Holy Spirit (female) (Against Heresies 1:2:5, Refutation of Heresies
31:3). Their activity among the Aeons represents an archetype of the
ministry of Jesus and the Spirit to the earthly church.

As Christ, the Son revealed to the other Aeons that the Father is
incomprehensible and that the truth can only be known through him (Against
Heresies 1:2:5 cf. Matthew 11:27). The Holy Spirit taught them to give
thanks and made them all equal (Against Heresies 1:2:5-6 cf. Gospel of
Truth 24:9-20). This is baptism in the fullest sense of the word
(Tripartite Tractate 126:27-129:34). It applies both to the Aeons and to
the human Church, as Valentinus says: "The Father reveals his bosom. Now
his bosom is the Holy Spirit. He reveals what is hidden of him - what is
hidden of him is his Son (i.e. Christ) - so that through the mercies of
the Father the Aeons may know him and cease laboring in search of the
Father, resting there in him, knowing that this is the rest" (Gospel of
Truth 24:9-20).

All of the Aeons then joined together and became united in the Son who is
also called Savior. The Savior is the complete Name that all of the Aeons
say together. Recalling the analogy of the individual Aeons to letters
that make up a name, only the Savior has the complete Name since he alone
derives from all of the Aeons (cf. Gospel of Truth 38:6-41:3). According
to Marcus, the image of this is the "Amen" which we all say together when
we pray (Against Heresies 1:14:1). The Savior also receives the titles
Word, and Christ after his constituent entities (cf. Against Heresies
1:2:6). Saint Paul says, "He is the All" (Colossians 3:11), and "In him
the whole Fullness of the Godhead dwells" (Colossians 2:9) since he comes
from all of the Aeons.The Son who manifested himself as the wealth and
diversity of divine energies is thereby reconstituted and united. All of
the various aspects of the Son are integrated into a single personality.

The Savior and is destined to be the male partner or bridegroom (cf.
Matthew 9:15) of the fallen Wisdom outside of the Limit (cf. Against
Heresies 1:2:6, Refutation of Heresies 32:1-2, Tripartite Tractate
85:15-90:3, Excerpts of Theodotus 23:1) who is the joint product of the
disunity of the Aeons. The Savior is associated with a retinue of angels
who are the prototypes of the spiritual element present in every Christian
(Against Heresies 1:2:6, Excerpts of Theodotus 39-40). Like rays of the
sun, they are not distinct or self-sufficient individuals. Rather, they
represent the dynamic richness of Jesus.



The Suffering of the Lower Wisdom

As a result of the fall, the lower Wisdom (i.e. the aborted Thinking) was
trapped in a lower realm along with the deficiency and suffering. This
lower realm or "deficiency" is the physical universe. Just as the Fullness
is a product of the Son and lies within him, so also the realm of
deficiency is a product of the Fullness and lies within it "as the center
within a circle or a stain in a garment" (Against Heresies 2:4:2) The
deficiency lies "outside" the Fullness only with regard to knowledge
(Against Heresies 2:4:2). Just as the deficiency arose as result of
ignorance, it will be dissolved through knowledge.

The fallen Wisdom is sometimes called "Achamoth" from the Hebrew word for
wisdom and "Holy Spirit" after the one with Christ. She is the heavenly
Jerusalem (cf. Revelation 21:9-10) and the lost sheep of the parable
(Matthew 18:11-14). Trapped in a lower realm and ignorant of her true
origin, she is the archetype of the individual person.

She continued her futile quest to know God without knowing Christ but she
was prevented from ascending to the Fullness by the Limit. As a result of
her ignorance, she continued to experience emotional sufferings of grief,
fear and confusion. She experienced the world as a place of illusion and
she was unable to distinguish reality from her own fantasy. This state of
illusion and suffering (i.e. the deficiency) is the essence of the world
experienced by all those who are ignorant of God (cf. Gospel of Truth
29:1-7, Against Heresies 2:14:3, Treatise on the Resurrection 48:21-29).

Then Wisdom (Sophia) underwent a conversion and thought about the ones who
had given her life. As a result she became cheerful and laughed (Against
Heresies 1:4:2). She began to plead with them for assistance (Against
Heresies 1:4:5, Refutation of Heresies 32:3). Her conversion and pleading
are a state of being intermediate between ignorance and spiritual
knowledge. Since they represent the longing for the divine, the pleading
and conversion became personified as a figure called the "Craftsman". He
represents the defective image that those who are ignorant (but repentant)
mistakenly worship as "God".

The Son Descends to Lower Wisdom

In response to Wisdom's pleading, the Savior "emptied himself"
(Philippians 2:7) and descended outside the Fullness into the deficiency
with his retinue of angels (Excerpts of Theodotus 35:1, Against Heresies
1:4:5). He and Wisdom (Sophia) were joined together as a pair of Aeons.
Through knowledge of the eternal realm she was freed of illusion and
suffering.

Wisdom (Sophia) rejoiced at the sight of the Savior and his retinue of
angels, and brought forth spiritual seeds in their image. These seeds are
the spiritual element present in every Christian. For this reason the
seeds are referred to as the Church. They are considered to be an image of
the pre-existent Church in the Fullness (Against Heresies 1:5:6, Excerpts
of Theodotus 40).

The female seeds and the male angels are what is referred to by the
statement, "In the image of God he created them, male and female he
created them" (Genesis 1:27 cf. Excepts of Theodotus 21:1). Just as the
Savior is the bridegroom of Wisdom (Sophia), so also the angels will be
the bridegrooms of the seeds at the end of time.

Thus three states of being or "substances" came into being from Wisdom
(Sophia) as a result of her quest to know God. First the illusion which
characterizes mundane existence came from ignorance and suffering. Second
came conversion and pleading which represent an intermediate stage between
ignorance and knowledge. Last the spiritual seed came from her knowledge.

The myth of Wisdom's suffering and ultimate redemption can be understood
as an allegory of the individual person's spiritual development. The
search for God through Thinking alone, without knowing Christ leads to
suffering and a defective concept of God as an anthropomorphic creator and
lawgiver. It is only through the intervention of the Savior, that these
false concepts can be left behind and true knowledge can be attained.

The Material Creation

The creation of the material world was necessary in order that the
spiritual seeds might go forth in immaturity and be trained here (cf.
Against Heresies 1:7:5). Since she could not create this world directly,
Wisdom (Sophia) influenced the Craftsman to give material things form.
Through him she made "the heaven and the earth" (Genesis 1:13 cf. Excerpts
of Theodotus 47:1-2, Against Heresies 1:5:1). The Craftsman is ignorant of
his mother and thinks that he acts alone, but he unconsciously acts as her
agent (cf. 1 Corinthians 2:8).

The Craftsman created seven angelic beings or "heavens" and dwells above
them. For this reason he is called Seventh. The Craftsman's seven angels
represent the seven days of creation in the book of Genesis. The
Craftsman's mother Wisdom (Sophia) and the Savior dwell above him in the
eighth heaven. These eight heavens are in the image of the Eight Aeons in
the Fullness (Against Heresies 1:5:2). Wisdom (Sophia) and the Savior
secretly influenced the Craftsman to make the material universe in the
image of the things in the Fullness. This is so that Truth might be
manifest to those who know to seek it, even in the midst of illusion and
deficiency.

Human beings were formed by the Craftsman in the image of the pre-existent
Humanity. They consist of a material body, a demonic element, a rational
soul and the spiritual seed. The spiritual seed is capable of attaining to
knowledge (gnosis) of God through the mediation of Jesus. Each person who
receives knowledge destroys a portion of the deficiency and brings the
Godhead one step closer to reintegration. The consummation or end of the
world will occur when "all that is spiritual has been shaped by knowledge"
(Against Heresies 1:6:1).

The spirits then put aside animate souls and with their mother Wisdom
(Sophia), they enter the Fullness. Wisdom (Sophia), who is the new
Jerusalem (Revelation 21:9-10) is joined to her bridegroom, the Savior.
Likewise, the spirits are joined to the angels (Against Heresies 1:7:1,
Excerpts of Theodotus 64:1, Valentinian Exposition 39:28-33, Gospel of
Philip 81:34-82:25). They all "attain to the vision of the Father and
become intellectual Aeons, entering into the intelligible and eternal
union in marriage" (Excerpts of Theodotus 64:1). The entire Fullness is
the "bridal chamber" for their union (Against Heresies 1:7:1, Excerpts of
Theodotus 64:1).

Then the "fire which is hidden in the world will blaze up and ignite and
destroy all matter and consume itself at the same time and pass into
nothingness" (Against Heresies 1:7:1). The physical world will cease to
exist. The deficiency will then have been eliminated and the process of
restoration will be complete.





Content authored by David Brons

