The Gnostic Society Library

| Valentinus Index |  Gnostic Society Library | Gnosis Archive |



Valentinian Scriptural Interpretation

General Principles

One of the things that is immediately apparent when reading the ancient
Valentinian  sources is the seemingly arbitrary scriptural interpretation.
However, in her her two books on the subject, Elaine Pagels (1973, 1975)
demonstrates that Valentinian Biblical interpretation is systematic.

Members of the Valentinian school rejected the way most of their
contemporary Christians interpreted the Bible as being overly literal. In
their view, the Bible has to be interpreted in a spiritual manner. In some
cases, the literal teaching is the spiritual meaning. e.g. the Sermon on
the Mount. But for other, passages, the true spiritual meaning lay hidden
behind the literal text in allegorical symbols. Valentinians claimed to
have the secret to unlocking this hidden spiritual meaning. They supported
these conclusions by citing Jesus himself: "The knowledge about the
secrets of the kingdom of heaven has been given to you, but to the rest it
comes by means of parables so that they may look but not see and listen
but not understand"(Luke 8:9-10 cf. Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:3:1).
According to the Valentinian tradition, Paul and the other apostles
revealed these teachings only to those who were 'spiritually mature' (1
Corinthians 2:6). They identified their own teaching with these secret
teachings that Jesus taught the to the apostles.

They claimed that Valentinian tradition formed a sort of "secret key" to
Biblical interpretation. As one teacher says, "The scriptures are
ambiguous and the truth cannot be extracted from them by those who are
ignorant of tradition." (Irenaeus Against Heresies3:2:1). Only those who
had received these secret apostolic teachings could correctly interpret
scriptures.

In their view, the Bible and all of the events and characters within it
had to be read as metaphors that pointed to a higher reality. Literalist
interpretation acts as a barrier to true understanding. As on writer said,
"Truth did not come into the world naked; rather it came in prototypes and
images: the world will not accept it in any other form" (Gospel of Philip
67:9-12). The Gospels and all of the events described in them "are
representations of ones in that other realm" (Ir1:7:2) and are "a symbol
and a dispensation for the conversion and salvation of humanity" (Acts of
John 102). Valentinians treated the Bible as an allegory that disclosed an
inner process of redemption in metaphors.

They rejected readings of the Gospel as being consistent with the Law.
Rather, in their view, the spiritual law of love supercedes the Law given
in the Old Testament. They also rejected views of God as lawgiver and
creator of the material world as imperfect images (see Letter to Flora).
In their view, God does not reveal himself in historical events directly,
but rather symbolically. Only by proper interpretation of these events
does scripture become revelation to the reader.

In Valentinian theology, there are three major levels of existence: the
pleroma, the kenoma and the cosmos. The pleroma (Fullness) is the
spiritual realm of Aeons. The kenoma (void) is the void into which the
lower Sophia was cast outside of the pleroma. The cosmos is the world
created by the Craftsman (demiurge). According to Valentinian tradition,
the Bible allegorically discloses the details of these three levels of
existence (Pagels 1973).

The cosmic level of Biblical interpretation was made publicly available to
other Christians while the kenomic and pleromic levels of interpretation
were to be revealed only to those who were 'spiritually mature' (1
Corinthians 2:6). If a person was not ready to receive this level of
understanding, they would seem like nonsense "because their value can be
judged only on a spiritual basis" (1 Corinthians 2:14).

1. Cosmic Interpretation

Examples of writings interpreting the Bible at the cosmic level are the
Fragments of Herakleon, the Letter to Flora, the Treatise on the
Resurrection. The cosmic level of exegesis interpreted the Bible in terms
of the three substances that make up the human personality: spirit, soul
and carnal soul and the three levels of spiritual development. For example
the Samaritan woman in the Gospel of John was interpreted by Herakleon to
represent an archetype of the people who had attained to the spiritual
level. Also at the cosmic level, teachers made the distinction between the
Demiurge and the true God.

Valentinians did not neglect ethical matters. They regarded the spiritual
law of love fullfilled and superceded the Law in the Old Testament. The
law contained in the Ten Commandments was regarded as pure but imperfect
law which is fulfilled by Jesus. Other parts of the Law were interpreted
allogorically. For example laws commanding fasting were interpreted to
mean abstaining from sin (Letter to Flora 33:5:13-14). According to
Ptolemy, unjust laws and human laws instituted by Moses and the elders
were abolished by Jesus (Letter to Flora 33:4:10, 33:4:14, 33:5:1).

2. Kenomic Level

This level of interpretation deals with the fall of Sophia Achamoth
outside the Pleroma, her sufferings , the descent of the Savior, the
creation of the the three substances.(Irenaeus Against Heresies1:8:2,
1:8:4). Principles of interpretation at this level are discussed in
Irenaeus Against Heresies1:7:3. In the Old Testament, passages are
interpreted to have been spoken by Wisdom or her seed or by the Craftsman.
In the Gospels, Jesus is identified with the Savior while various other
figures are interpreted as allegorical representations of Wisdom (sophia)
or the Craftsman (demiurge) For example the centurion in Matthew 8:9 is
identified with the Craftsman (Irenaeus Against Heresies 1:7:4). The
sayings of Jesus are also interpreted allegorically in reference to these
three figures and episodes in the myth.

3. Pleromic Interpretation

This represents the most esoteric level of interpretation. Passages within
the Bible were interpreted to refer to the attributes and energies (Aeons)
of the divine Fullness or Pleroma A typical example is Ptolemy's
Commentary on the Prologue of John. They interpreteted references to
"Beginning","Life", "Word", "Humanity", "Grace" and "Truth" in the
prologue and subsequent passages to be references to the Aeons within the
Pleroma. Other examples of this level of interpretation are Irenaeus
Against Heresies 1:1:3, 1:3:1-2.

Multiple Interpretations

As Pagels (1973) clearly demonstrates, a given passage of scripture could
be allegorically interpreted on a cosmic, kenomic or pleromic level. Thus
it could receive up to three allegorical interpretations depending on
which level of exegesis is being given. This can be thought of like the
layers of an onion. Different layers of meaning could be found within the
same passage.

To illustrate this we will consider interpretation of a single passage
from prologue of the Gospel of John which was considered by Pagels. The
passage in question reads "All things were made through him and without
him was not anything made" (John 1:3). A cosmic or exoteric interpretation
of this passage is provided in Herakleon Fragment 1 and Ptolemy's Letter
to Flora 3:26. In both cases, the passage is interpreted to refer to the
Savior who is the cause of the creation of all the things of this world by
means of the Craftsman (demiurge).

An interpretation of the passage in terms of the kenoma (void) is given in
the Excerpts of Theodotus 45:3 (cf also Ptolemy in Irenaeus Against
Heresies1:4:5). Theodotus interprets this passage to refer to the Savior
who by delivering the fallen Wisdom (Sophia) from her ignorance 'brings
her into existence' and creates the external elements of the universe.

Finally, Ptolemy interprets the same passage in terms of the Aeons in the
Fullness (pleroma) in his Commentary on the Prologue of John quoted in
Irenaeus Against Heresies1:8:5 (cf also Excerpts of Theodotus 6:4). In
this case, Ptolemy interprets the passage to refer to the Aeon Word
(logos) who, along with his partner Life (zoe), is the one who is
responsible for the creation of all subsequent Aeons

Levels of Instruction

Instruction was sharply divided into literal, exoteric (publicly
available) and esoteric teachings. The literal teachings consisted of the
story of literal story of Jesus in the Gospel. The publicly available or
exoteric teaching consisted of Valentinian doctrine as applied to the
cosmic level of existence such as teaching about resurrection, the Law,
Christology, the three natures, and so on. The esoteric level of
instruction consisted of theology of the pleroma, and the myth of the fall
in all of its complexity.

The teacher was expected to discern the person's level of spiritual
development and teach accordingly. In doing this, they believed they were
following the example of Jesus. In the Acts of John, Jesus says, "I must
adapt myself to your hearing and according to each person's capacity I
will impart to you those things of which you can be hearers" (Acts of John
87). This is discussed in the parable of appropriate diets in the Gospel
of Philip: "Bodily forms will not deceive them, rather they consider the
condition of each person's soul and they speak to that person accordingly.
In the world there are many animals that have human form. If the disciples
of God recognize that they are hogs, they feed them acorns; if cattle,
barley chaff and fodder; if dogs, bones; if slaves, a first course; if
children, a complete meal" (Gospel of Philip 81:3-13). If a person was
considered to be at a material level of development (i.e. "an animal")
they received the literal teaching ("acorns", "chaff" and "bones") and
nothing more. Critics of the Valentinians record that it was hard to get
anything out of them regarding their teachings if you were perceived as
hostile (e.g. Tertullian Against the Valentinians 1). Presumably the
Valentinians whom they were in contact assigned them to this category! In
practice, People assigned to this category would not have gone on to the
higher levels of instruction.

If the person was considered to be at an psychic level (i.e. "a slave")
they received the cosmic level of teaching ( "a first course").
Valentinians saw most Christians as fitting into this category. If one was
in this category there was the capacity for growth as instruction was
given and the person could eventually move on to the next level. If the
person had progressed to a spiritual level and become a "child" they
received the complete teaching. According to Tertullian, complete
instruction could last as long as five years and involved rigorous
self-discipline. It should be noted that all who received the esoteric
teaching were bound by the "duty of Silence" not to disclose it to
non-initiates (cf. Tertullian Against the Valentinians 1).

Myth and Metaphor

While Valentinians saw their own teachings and myth allegorically hidden
within the Bible, this does not mean that they regarded the myth itself as
literally true. Rather it as well was seen as a metaphor to describe what
was essentially undescribable. According to the Gospel of Philip, "Truth
did not come into the world naked; rather it came in prototypes and
images: the world will not accept it in any other form" (Gospel of Philip
67:9-12). The myth was seen as an aid to understanding. The spiritual
person was expected to recognize the truth hidden metaphorically within
the myth.

Valentinians had a radically different aproach to scripture and doctrine
than most of their "orthodox" contemporaries. Because they saw scriptures
and teachings as metaphorical, they did not place any emphasis on
doctrinal uniformity. The diversity of teaching within the school reflects
this. Different teachers placed a different emphasis on various aspects of
the myth and theology. Yet all these minor differences are simply
variations on a theme.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

