The Gnostic Society Library

| Valentinus Index |  Gnostic Society Library | Gnosis Archive |



The Valentinian School

The followers of Valentinus are refered to as "Valentinians". The major
Valentinian theological schools were at Rome, Alexandria and Antioch. The
most notable teacher of the Alexandrian school was Theodotus. Ptolemy and
Herakleon were the most important teachers of the Roman school. The school
at Antioch rose to prominence around 200 AD under Axionicus.

Valentinus never intended to set up a separate church and his followers
continued to be active members of Catholic congregations throughout the
second and third centuries. Some members of the Church hierarchy were
sympathetic to the movement. As late as 200 AD it was still possible for a
Valentinian to hold the ecclesiastical rank of presbyter at Rome.

After Christianity became the state religion of the Roman Empire in 326
AD, a concerted effort was made to expel the Valentinians from the Church
along with other "heretics". By 350 AD, Christian monks in Egypt were
hiding Valentinian and other "heretical" writings that were part of their
libraries. A small core of believers continued to be active into the
seventh century, particularly in Syria. However, they were unable to
withstand persecution by the Catholic Church indefinitely and the
Valentinian school had ceased to exist as a distinct movement by the ninth
century.

Even after the demise of Valentinian school, Valentinus' influence
continued among medieval Gnostic groups such as the Paulicians and the
Cathars. He also exerted considerable influence on "orthodox" Christian
mysticism. In this century one can find evidence of his legacy in the
psychology of Carl Jung and in Gnostic churches such as the Ecclesia
Gnostica. As the millenium approaches there is renewed interest in the
teachings of the great master himself.

══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Organization of the Valentinian School
History of Valentinianism
Notable Valentinians



Content authored by David Brons

